GLOBAL ACTION PLAN 
ON ANTIMICROBIAL 
RESISTANCE

WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Global Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance.
I.World Health Organization.
 
ISBN 978 92 4 150976 3 
 
 
 
 
Subject headings are available from WHO institutional repository
 World Health Organization 2015
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO web site (www.who.int) or can be purchased 
from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; 
e-mail: bookorders@who.int). 
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications whether for sale or for non-commercial distribution should be addressed 
to WHO Press through the WHO website (www.who.int/about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on 
the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning 
the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be 
full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the 
World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of 
proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this publication. However, 
the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation 
and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use. 
The definitive version of the Global Action Plan can be found in the official records of the Sixty-eighth World Health Assembly (document 
WHA68/2015/REC/1, Annex 3.)
Design and layout: www.paprika-annecy.com
Printed by the WHO Document Production Services, Geneva, Switzerland

Contents
V
Foreword..................................................................................................................VII
Introduction...............................................................................................................1
Scope..........................................................................................................................2
The challenge............................................................................................................3
The way forward........................................................................................................5
Consultative process.................................................................................................7
Strategic objectives...................................................................................................8
 Objective 1: 
Improve awareness and understanding of antimicrobial resistance through effective 
communication, education and training................................................................................8
 Objective 2: 
Strengthen the knowledge and evidence base through surveillance and research........8
 Objective 3: 
Reduce the incidence of infection through effective sanitation, hygiene and 
infection prevention measures................................................................................................9
Objective 4: 
Optimize the use of antimicrobial medicines in human and animal health....................10
Objective 5: 
Develop the economic case for sustainable investment that takes account 
of the needs of all countries, and increase investment in new medicines, 
diagnostic tools, vaccines and other interventions.............................................................11
Framework for action on antimicrobial resistance...............................................12

VII
Antimicrobial resistance threatens the very core of modern medicine and the sustainability of an effective, global public 
health response to the enduring threat from infectious diseases. Effective antimicrobial drugs are prerequisites for 
both preventive and curative measures, protecting patients from potentially fatal diseases and ensuring that complex 
procedures, such as surgery and chemotherapy, can be provided at low risk. Yet systematic misuse and overuse of 
these drugs in human medicine and food production have put every nation at risk. Few replacement products are in the 
pipeline. Without harmonized and immediate action on a global scale, the world is heading towards a post-antibiotic 
era in which common infections could once again kill.
Alert to this crisis, the May 2015 World Health Assembly adopted a global action plan on antimicrobial resistance, 
which outlines five objectives:
`
` to improve awareness and understanding of antimicrobial resistance through effective communication, education 
and training; 
`
` to strengthen the knowledge and evidence base through surveillance and research; 
`
` to reduce the incidence of infection through effective sanitation, hygiene and infection prevention measures; 
`
` to optimize the use of antimicrobial medicines in human and animal health; 
`
` to develop the economic case for sustainable investment that takes account of the needs of all countries and to 
increase investment in new medicines, diagnostic tools, vaccines and other interventions.
This action plan underscores the need for an effective one health approach involving coordination among numerous 
international sectors and actors, including human and veterinary medicine, agriculture, finance, environment, and well-
informed consumers. The action plan recognizes and addresses both the variable resources nations have to combat 
antimicrobial resistance and the economic factors that discourage the development of replacement products by the 
pharmaceutical industry. 
An all-out effort is needed. WHO will work with the United Nations to tackle antimicrobial resistance at the political 
level. Our strong collaboration with FAO and OIE will continue. A framework for monitoring and evaluating national 
activities is being developed. The objective is to have multisectoral national action plans in place by the 2017 World 
Health Assembly. 
Antimicrobial resistance is a crisis that must be managed with the utmost urgency. As the world enters the ambitious 
new era of sustainable development, we cannot allow hard-won gains for health to be eroded by the failure of our 
mainstay medicines. 
Dr Margaret Chan
Director-General
World Health Organization
Foreword

1
Introduction
1. 
 
 When microbes become resistant to medicines, the options 
for treating the diseases they cause are reduced. 
This resistance to antimicrobial medicines is happening 
in all parts of the world for a broad range of microorganisms 
with an increasing prevalence that threatens human 
and animal health. The direct consequences of infection 
with resistant microorganisms can be severe, including 
longer illnesses, increased mortality, prolonged stays 
in hospital, loss of protection for patients undergoing 
operations and other medical procedures, and increased 
costs. Antimicrobial resistance affects all areas of health, 
involves many sectors and has an impact on the whole 
of society.
2. 
 
 The indirect impact of antimicrobial resistance, however, 
extends beyond increased health risks and has many 
public health consequences with wide implications, 
for instance on development. Antimicrobial resistance 
is a drain on the global economy with economic losses 
due to reduced productivity caused by sickness (of both 
human beings and animals) and higher costs of treatment. 
To counter it needs long-term investment, such as financial 
and technical support for developing countries and in 
development of new medicines, diagnostic tools, vaccines 
and other interventions, and in strengthening health 
systems to ensure more appropriate use of and access 
to antimicrobial agents.
3. 
 
 The development of this global action plan on antimicrobial 
resistance1, requested by the Health Assembly in resolution 
WHA67.25 in May 2014, reflects a global consensus that 
antimicrobial resistance poses a profound threat to human 
health. It reflects the input received to date from broad 
multisectoral and Member States consultations.
4. 
 
 The goal of the global action plan is to ensure, for as 
long as possible, continuity of successful treatment and 
prevention of infectious diseases with effective and safe 
medicines that are quality-assured, used in a responsible 
way, and accessible to all who need them. It is expected 
that countries will develop their own national action plans 
on antimicrobial resistance in line with the global plan.
5. 
 
 To achieve this goal, the global action plan sets out 
five strategic objectives: (1) to improve awareness and 
understanding of antimicrobial resistance; (2) to strengthen 
knowledge through surveillance and research; (3) to 
reduce the incidence of infection; (4) to optimize the use 
of antimicrobial agents; and (5) to ensure sustainable 
investment in countering antimicrobial resistance. These 
objectives can be attained through the implementation of 
clearly identified actions by Member States, the Secretariat, 
and international and national partners across multiple 
sectors. The actions to optimize use of antimicrobial 
medicines and to renew investment in research and 
development of new products must be accompanied by 
actions to ensure affordable and equitable access by 
those who need them.
6. 
 
 With this approach, the main goal of ensuring treatment 
and prevention of infectious diseases with quality-assured, 
safe and effective medicines is achievable.
1 See resolution WHA68.7.

GLOBAL ACTION PLAN ON ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
2
7. 
 
 Antibiotic resistance develops when bacteria adapt and 
grow in the presence of antibiotics. The development of 
resistance is linked to how often antibiotics are used. 
Because many antibiotics belong to the same class of 
medicines, resistance to one specific antibiotic agent can 
lead to resistance to a whole related class. Resistance 
that develops in one organism or location can also spread 
rapidly and unpredictably, through, for instance, exchange 
of genetic material between different bacteria, and can 
affect antibiotic treatment of a wide range of infections 
and diseases. Drug-resistant bacteria can circulate in 
populations of human beings and animals, through food, 
water and the environment, and transmission is influenced 
by trade, travel and both human and animal migration. 
Resistant bacteria can be found in food animals and food 
products destined for consumption by humans.
8. 
 
 Some of these features also apply to medicines that are 
used to treat viral, parasitic and fungal diseases; hence 
the broader term antimicrobial resistance.
9. 
 
 The global action plan covers antibiotic resistance in 
most detail but also refers, where appropriate, to existing 
action plans for viral, parasitic and bacterial diseases, 
including HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis.2 Many of 
the actions proposed in this plan are equally applicable 
to antifungal resistance in addition to resistance in those 
other microorganisms.
10. 
 
 Antimicrobial resistance (and particularly antibiotic 
resistance) is spreading, and there are few prospects for 
the development of new classes of antibiotics in the short 
term. However, there is today considerable awareness of 
the need for, and political support for, action to combat 
antimicrobial resistance. Support is multisectoral, and there 
is increasing collaboration among the relevant sectors, 
in particular, human health, animal health and agriculture 
(including a tripartite collaboration agreed by FAO, OIE and 
WHO3). The need for urgent action is consistent with a 
precautionary approach,4 and national and international 
multisectoral action and collaboration should not be 
impeded by gaps in knowledge.
11. 
 
 This global action plan provides the framework for national 
action plans to combat antimicrobial resistance. It sets 
out the key actions that the various actors involved should 
take, using an incremental approach over the next 5-10 
years to combat antimicrobial resistance. These actions 
are structured around the five strategic objectives set out 
in paragraphs 29 47.
Scope
2 World Health Organization global strategy for the surveillance and monitoring 
of HIV drug resistance. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012. Guidelines for 
surveillance of drug resistance in tuberculosis, fourth edition. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2009. Companion handbook to the WHO guidelines for the 
programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2014. Global plan for artemisinin resistance containment. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2011. Emergency response to artemisinin resistance 
in the Greater Mekong subregion. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. See 
also resolution WHA62.15.
3 The FAO-OIE-WHO Collaboration: sharing responsibilities and coordinating global 
activities to address health risks at the animal-human-ecosystems interfaces 
 a tripartite concept note, 2010, available at http://www.who.int/influenza/ 
resources/documents/tripartite_concept_note_hanoi_042011_en.pdf (accessed 
20 November 2014).
4 Section IV: Risk analysis, paragraph 11. In: Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards 
Programme. Codex Alimentarius Commission: procedural manual, twenty-third 
edition. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; 2015:110.

3
12. 
 
 Improvements in global health over recent decades are 
under threat because the microorganisms that cause 
many common human diseases and medical conditions 
 including tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, malaria, sexually 
transmitted diseases, urinary tract infections, pneumonia, 
blood-stream infections and food poisoning have become 
resistant to a wide range of antimicrobial medicines. 
Doctors must increasingly use last-resort medicines that 
are more costly, may have more side effects and are often 
unavailable or unaffordable in low- and middle-income 
countries. Some cases of tuberculosis and gonorrhoea are 
now resistant even to antibiotics of last resort.
13. 
 
 Resistance develops more rapidly through the misuse 
and overuse of antimicrobial medicines. Antibiotic use for 
human health is reported to be increasing substantially. 
Surveys in a wide range of countries show that many 
patients believe that antibiotics will cure viral infections 
that cause coughs, colds and fever. Antibiotics are 
needed to treat sick animals but are also widely used 
in healthy animals to prevent disease and, in many 
countries, to promote growth through mass administration 
to herds. Antimicrobial agents are commonly used in plant 
agriculture and commercial fish and seafood farming. 
The potential impact of antimicrobials in the environment 
is also of concern to many.
14. 
 
 Antimicrobial resistance can affect all patients and 
families. Some of the commonest childhood diseases 
in developing countries malaria, pneumonia, other 
respiratory infections, and dysentery can no longer be 
cured with many older antibiotics or medicines. In lower-
income countries, effective and accessible antibiotics are 
crucial for saving the lives of children who have those 
diseases, as well as other conditions such as bacterial 
blood infections. In all countries, some routine surgical 
operations and cancer chemotherapy will become less safe 
without effective antibiotics to protect against infections.
15. 
 
 Health care workers have a vital role in preserving the 
power of antimicrobial medicines. Inappropriate prescribing 
and dispensing can lead to their misuse and overuse if 
medical staff lack up-to-date information, cannot identify 
the type of infection, yield to patient pressure to prescribe 
antibiotics, or benefit financially from supplying the 
medicines. Inadequate hygiene and infection prevention 
and control in hospitals help to spread infections. Hospital 
patients infected with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus have a higher risk of dying than those infected by 
a non-resistant form of the bacteria.
16. 
 
 For farmers, animal husbandry and the food industry, 
the loss of effective antimicrobial agents to treat sick 
animals damages food production and family livelihoods. 
An additional risk for livestock workers is exposure to 
animals carrying resistant bacteria. For example, farmers 
working with cattle, pigs and poultry that are infected 
with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus have 
a much higher risk of also being colonized or infected 
with these bacteria. Food is one of the possible vehicles 
for transmission of resistant bacteria from animals to 
human beings and human consumption of food carrying 
antibiotic-resistant bacteria has led to acquisition of 
antibiotic-resistant infections. Other risks for infection 
with resistant organisms include exposure to crops treated 
with antimicrobial agents or contaminated by manure or 
slurry, and farmyard run-offs into groundwater.
The challenge

GLOBAL ACTION PLAN ON ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
4
17. 
 
 Reducing antimicrobial resistance will require the political 
will to adopt new policies, including controlling the use 
of antimicrobial medicines in human health and animal 
and food production. In most countries, antibiotics can 
be purchased in markets, shops, pharmacies or over the 
Internet without prescription or involvement of a health 
professional or veterinarian. Poor quality medical and 
veterinary products are widespread, and often contain 
low concentrations of active ingredients, encouraging 
emergence of resistant microbes. Laws to ensure that 
medicines are of assured quality, safe, effective and 
accessible to those who need them need to be enacted 
and enforced.
18. 
 
 The World Economic Forum has identified antibiotic 
resistance as a global risk beyond the capacity of any 
organization or nation to manage or mitigate alone,5 
but in general there is little awareness of the potential 
social, economic and financial impacts of drug resistance. 
In developed economies, these include higher health 
care costs and decreases in labour supply, productivity, 
household incomes, and national income and tax revenues. 
In the European Union alone, a subset of drug-resistant 
bacteria is responsible annually for some 25 000 deaths, 
with extra health care costs and lost productivity due to 
antimicrobial resistance amounting to at least 1500 million. 
Similar analyses are needed for low- and middle-income 
countries. Resistance to common veterinary antimicrobial 
medicines also causes food production losses, poor animal 
welfare and extra costs. Antimicrobial resistance is sapping 
the global economy and the full economic case needs to 
be made for long-term sustainable investment to tackle 
the problem, including the ensuring of access to financial 
and technical support for developing countries.
19. 
 
 For the pharmaceutical sector, medicines that are no 
longer effective lose their value. Industry leaders are 
important partners in combating antimicrobial resistance, 
both by supporting the responsible use of medicines 
in order to prolong their effectiveness and through 
research and development of innovative medicines and 
other tools to combat resistance. No major new class 
of antibiotics has been discovered since 1987 and too 
few antibacterial agents are in development to meet 
the challenge of multidrug resistance. New concepts 
are needed for providing incentives for innovation and 
promoting cooperation among policy-makers, academia 
and the pharmaceutical industry to ensure that new 
technologies are available globally to prevent, diagnose 
and treat resistant infections. Public sector partnerships 
with the private sector are also important to help to ensure 
equitable access to quality-assured products and other 
related health technologies, through fair pricing and 
donations for the poorest populations.
5 Howell L, Ed. Global risks 2013: eighth edition. Geneva: World Economic 
Forum, 2013.

5
20. 
 
 Despite proposals and initiatives over many years to 
combat antimicrobial resistance, progress has been slow, 
in part because of, on the one hand, inadequate monitoring 
and reporting at national, regional and global levels, and, 
on the other, inadequate recognition by all stakeholders 
of the need for action in their respective areas.
21. 
 
 At the national level, operational action plans to combat 
antimicrobial resistance are needed to support strategic 
frameworks.6 All Member States are urged to have in 
place, within two years of the endorsement of the action 
plan by the Health Assembly, national action plans 
on antimicrobial resistance that are aligned with the 
global action plan and with standards and guidelines 
established by intergovernmental bodies such as the 
Codex Alimentarius Commission, FAO and OIE. These 
national action plans are needed to provide the basis for 
an assessment of the resource needs, and should take 
into account national and regional priorities. Partners and 
other stakeholders, including FAO, OIE, the World Bank, 
industry associations and foundations, should also put 
in place and implement action plans in their respective 
field of responsibility to counter antimicrobial resistance, 
and report progress as part of their reporting cycles. 
All action plans should reflect the following principles:
 (1) Whole-of-society engagement including a one-
health approach. Antimicrobial resistance will affect 
everybody, regardless of where they live, their health, 
economic circumstances, lifestyle or behaviour. It will 
affect sectors beyond human health, such as animal health, 
agriculture, food security and economic development. 
Therefore, everybody in all sectors and disciplines 
should be engaged in the implementation of the action plan, 
and in particular in efforts to preserve the effectiveness 
of antimicrobial medicines through conservation and 
stewardship programmes.
 (2) Prevention first. Every infection prevented is one that 
needs no treatment. Prevention of infection can be cost 
effective and implemented in all settings and sectors, 
even where resources are limited. Good sanitation, hygiene 
and other infection prevention measures that can slow the 
development and restrict the spread of difficult-to-treat 
antibiotic-resistant infections are a best buy .
 (3) Access. The aim to preserve the ability to treat 
serious infections requires both equitable access to, 
and appropriate use of, existing and new antimicrobial 
medicines. Effective implementation of national and global 
action plans to address antimicrobial resistance depends 
also on access, inter alia, to health facilities, health care 
professionals, veterinarians, preventive technologies, 
diagnostic tools including those which are point of care , 
and to knowledge, education and information.
The way forward
6 The Secretariat has worked with Member States to collate information on the 
status of national action plans on antimicrobial resistance and on regulations 
and policies for use of antimicrobial medicines. A report based on these data 
provides a baseline against which future progress at national and global levels 
can be monitored and reported, see http://www.who.int/drugresistance/documents/
situationanalysis/en/ (accessed 9 September 2015).

GLOBAL ACTION PLAN ON ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
6
 (4) Sustainability. All countries should have a national 
action plan on antimicrobial resistance that includes an 
assessment of resource needs. The implementation of these 
plans will require long-term investment, for instance in 
surveillance, operational research, laboratories, human and 
animal health systems, competent regulatory capacities, 
and professional education and training, in both the human 
and animal health sectors. Political commitment and 
international collaboration are needed to promote the 
technical and financial investment necessary for effective 
development and implementation of national action plans.
 (5) Incremental targets for implementation. Member 
States are at very different stages in terms of developing 
and implementing national plans to combat antimicrobial 
resistance. To enable all countries to make the most 
progress towards implementing the global action plan 
on antimicrobial resistance, flexibility will be built into 
the monitoring and reporting arrangements in order to 
allow each country to determine the priority actions that 
it needs to take in order to attain each of the five strategic 
objectives and to implement the actions in a stepwise 
manner that meets both local needs and global priorities.

7
22. 
 
 In May 2014, the Sixty-seventh World Health Assembly 
adopted resolution WHA67.25 on antimicrobial resistance, 
in which it requested, inter alia, the Director-General, 
to develop a draft global action plan to combat antimicrobial 
resistance, including antibiotic resistance, and to submit 
the draft to the Sixty-eighth World Health Assembly, through 
the Executive Board.
23. 
 
 To initiate the preparation of a draft global action plan, 
the Secretariat used the recommendations of the Strategic and 
Technical Advisory Group on antimicrobial resistance,7 existing 
national and regional action plans, WHO s guidance and action 
plans on related subjects, as well as other available evidence 
and analysis.8 The Secretariat regularly consulted FAO and OIE, 
for example through meetings as part of the tripartite collaboration 
and through their participation in other consultations, to ensure a 
one-health approach and consistency with Codex Alimentarius 
and OIE international standards and guidelines.
24. 
 
 At its second meeting (Geneva, 14-16 April 2014),9 the 
Strategic and Technical Advisory Group considered input 
from more than 30 additional participants, including 
representatives of intergovernmental organizations, civil 
society, public health and regulatory agencies, industry 
associations, professional organizations and patient 
groups. At a subsequent meeting (Geneva, 17 October 
2014), the Advisory Group reviewed the text of the draft 
global action plan. The Strategic and Technical Advisory 
Group recently held its fourth meeting (Geneva, 24 and 
25 February 2015) in order to provide advice to the 
Secretariat on finalization of the draft global action plan.
25. 
 
 During July and August 2014 the Secretariat held a web-
based consultation for Member States and other relevant 
stakeholders, attracting 130 comments and contributions, 
including 54 from Member States, 40 from nongovernmental 
organizations and 16 from private-sector entities.
26. 
 
 Between June and November 2014, Member States, 
stakeholders and the Secretariat convened additional 
high-level technical, political and interagency discussions 
to contribute to the action plan.10 These included the 
Ministerial Conference on Antibiotic Resistance: joining 
forces for future health (The Hague, 25 and 26 June 2014); 
a meeting on the Global Health Security Agenda, including 
antimicrobial resistance (Jakarta, 20 and 21 August 
2014); an informal Member States consultation to provide 
direct input on the draft plan (Geneva, 16 October 2014); 
a meeting on the responsible use of antibiotics (Oslo, 
13 and 14 November 2014); and a meeting on global 
surveillance capacity, systems and standards (Stockholm, 
2 and 3 December 2014).
Consultative process
7 Details of the Strategic and Technical Advisory Group on antimicrobial resistance 
and its recommendations are available at: http://www.who.int/drugresistance/
stag/en/ (accessed 18 November 2014).
8 Details of national and regional action plans, WHO guidance and action 
plans for specific diseases and health topics including antimicrobial 
resistance, standards and guidelines established by intergovernmental 
organizations such as FAO and OIE, and other information taken into account 
are documented in supplementary material, see http://www.who.int/ 
drugresistance/documents/situationanalysis/en/ (accessed 9 September 2015).
9 The report of the meeting is available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/ 
128675/1/WHO_HSE_PED_AIP_2014.4_eng.pdf?ua=1&ua=1 (accessed 
18 November 2014).
10 Information on these consultations is available at: http://www.who.int/drugresistance/
en/ (accessed 9 March 2015).

GLOBAL ACTION PLAN ON ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
8
27. 
 
 The overall goal of the action plan is to ensure, for as 
long as possible, continuity of the ability to treat and 
prevent infectious diseases with effective and safe 
medicines that are quality-assured, used in a responsible 
way, and accessible to all who need them.
28. 
 
 To achieve this overall goal, five strategic objectives 
have been identified. These are set out below with the 
corresponding actions for Member States, the Secretariat 
(including actions for FAO, OIE and WHO within the tripartite 
collaboration), and international organizations and other 
partners, in the tables following paragraph 50. It is expected 
that countries will develop their own national action plans 
on antimicrobial resistance in line with the global plan.
 Objective 1: Improve awareness 
and understanding of 
antimicrobial resistance through 
effective communication, 
education and training
29. 
 
 Steps need to be taken immediately in order to raise 
awareness of antimicrobial resistance and promote 
behavioural change, through public communication 
programmes that target different audiences in human 
health, animal health and agricultural practice as well as 
consumers. Inclusion of the use of antimicrobial agents 
and resistance in school curricula will promote better 
understanding and awareness from an early age.
30. 
 
 Making antimicrobial resistance a core component of 
professional education, training, certification, continuing 
education and development in the health and veterinary 
sectors and agricultural practice will help to ensure proper 
understanding and awareness among professionals.
 Objective 2: Strengthen the 
knowledge and evidence base 
through surveillance and 
research
31. 
 
 Actions and investments to tackle antimicrobial 
resistance should be supported by clear rationales of 
their benefit and cost effectiveness. National governments, 
intergovernmental organizations, agencies, professional 
organizations, nongovernmental organizations, industry 
and academia have important roles in generating such 
knowledge and translating it into practice.
32. 
 
 Particularly important gaps in knowledge that need to be 
filled include the following:
`
` Information on: the incidence, prevalence, range 
across pathogens and geographical patterns related 
to antimicrobial resistance is needed to be made 
accessible in a timely manner in order to guide the 
treatment of patients; to inform local, national and 
regional actions; and to monitor the effectiveness 
of interventions;
`
` Understanding how resistance develops and spreads, 
including how resistance circulates within and between 
humans and animals and through food, water and 
the environment, is important for the development 
of new tools, policies and regulations to counter 
antimicrobial resistance;
`
` The ability rapidly to characterize newly emerged 
resistance in microorganisms and elucidate the 
underlying mechanisms; this knowledge is necessary 
to ensure that surveillance and diagnostic tools and 
methods remain current;
Strategic objectives

9
`
` Understanding social science and behaviour, and other 
research needed to support the achievement of 
Objectives 1, 3 and 4, including studies to support 
effective antimicrobial stewardship programmes in 
human and animal health and agriculture;
`
` Research, including clinical studies conducted in 
accordance with relevant national and international 
governance arrangements, on treatments and 
prevention for common bacterial infections, especially 
in low resource settings;
`
` Basic research and translational studies to support 
the development of new treatments, diagnostic tools, 
vaccines and other interventions;
`
` Research to identify alternatives to nontherapeutic 
uses of antimicrobial agents in agriculture and 
aquaculture, including their use for growth promotion 
and crop protection;
`
` Economic research, including the development of 
models to assess the cost of antimicrobial resistance 
and the costs and benefits of this action plan.
33. 
 
 WHO s global report on surveillance of antimicrobial 
resistance11 also revealed many gaps in information on 
antimicrobial resistance in pathogens of major public health 
importance. International standards on harmonization 
of national antimicrobial resistance surveillance and 
monitoring programmes were adopted by OIE s members in 
2012, but there are no internationally agreed standards for 
collection of data and reporting on antibacterial resistance 
in human health, and no harmonizing standards across 
medical, veterinary and agricultural sectors. In addition, 
there is no global forum for the rapid sharing of information 
on antimicrobial resistance.
34. 
 
 In 2013, some Member States of the European Union 
published a strategic research agenda on antimicrobial 
resistance through a joint programming initiative.12 This 
initiative, which includes some countries outside the 
European Union, could provide an initial framework for 
further development of a global strategic research agenda.
 Objective 3: Reduce the incidence 
of infection through effective 
sanitation, hygiene and infection 
prevention measures
35. 
 
 Many of the most serious and difficult-to-treat antibiotic-
resistant infections occur in health care facilities, not only 
because that is where patients with serious infections are 
admitted but also because of the intensive use therein 
of antibiotics. Although the development of resistance 
in such situations may be a natural consequence of 
necessary antimicrobial use, inadequate measures to 
prevent and control infection may contribute to the spread 
of microorganisms resistant to antimicrobial medicines.
36. 
 
 Better hygiene and infection prevention measures 
are essential to limit the development and spread of 
antimicrobial-resistant infections and multidrug-resistant 
bacteria. Effective prevention of infections transmitted 
through sex or drug injection as well as better sanitation, 
hand washing, and food and water safety must also be 
core components of infectious disease prevention.
37. 
 
 Vaccination, where appropriate as an infection prevention 
measure, should be encouraged. Immunization can reduce 
antimicrobial resistance in three ways:
11 Antimicrobial resistance: global report on surveillance 2014. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2014.
12 Strategic Research Agenda: Joint Programming Initiative on Antimicrobial Resistance. 
The Hague, JPIAMR, 2013.

GLOBAL ACTION PLAN ON ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
10
`
` Existing vaccines can prevent infectious diseases whose 
treatment would require antimicrobial medicines;
`
` Existing vaccines can reduce the prevalence of primary 
viral infections, which are often inappropriately treated 
with antibiotics, and which can also give rise to 
secondary infections that require antibiotic treatment;
`
` Development and use of new or improved vaccines can 
prevent diseases that are becoming difficult to treat 
or are untreatable owing to antimicrobial resistance.
38. 
 
 Much antibiotic use is linked to animal production. 
Antibiotics are sometimes used to prevent infections, 
to prevent the spread of diseases within a herd when 
infection occurs, and as a growth stimulant, and are 
often administered through feed and water. Sustainable 
husbandry practices, including the use of vaccines, 
can reduce infection rates and dependence on antibiotics 
as well as the risk that antibiotic-resistant organisms will 
develop and spread through the food chain.
Objective 4: Optimize the use 
of antimicrobial medicines in 
human and animal health
39. 
 
 Evidence that antimicrobial resistance is driven by the 
volume of use of antimicrobial agents is compelling. 
High antibiotic use may reflect over-prescription, 
easy access through over-the-counter sales, and more 
recently sales via the Internet which are widespread in 
many countries. Despite measures taken by some Member 
States, antibiotic use in humans, animals and agriculture is 
still increasing globally. The projected increase in demand 
for animal food products may lead to yet further increases 
in antibiotic use.
40. 
 
 Data on antibiotic use are collected and analysed in many 
high- and middle-income countries and OIE is developing 
a database on antibiotic use in animals. However, data are 
lacking on antibiotic use in human beings at the point of 
care and from lower-income countries.
41. 
 
 More widespread recognition of antimicrobial medicines as 
a public good is needed in order to strengthen regulation 
of their distribution, quality and use, and encourage 
investment in research and development. In some cases, 
industry spending on promoting products is greater than 
governmental investment in promoting rational use of 
antimicrobial medicines or providing objective information.
42. 
 
 Decisions to prescribe antibiotics are rarely based on 
definitive diagnoses. Effective, rapid, low-cost diagnostic 
tools are needed for guiding optimal use of antibiotics in 
human and animal medicine, and such tools should be 
easily integrated into clinical, pharmacy and veterinary 
practices. Evidence-based prescribing and dispensing 
should be the standard of care.
43. 
 
 Regulation of the use of antimicrobial agents is inadequate 
or poorly enforced in many areas, such as over-the-counter 
and Internet sales. Related weaknesses that contribute 
to development of antimicrobial resistance include poor 
patient and health care provider compliance, the prevalence 
of substandard medicines for both human and veterinary 
use, and inappropriate or unregulated use of antimicrobial 
agents in agriculture.

11
Objective 5: Develop the 
economic case for sustainable 
investment that takes account 
of the needs of all countries, 
and increase investment in new 
medicines, diagnostic tools, 
vaccines and other interventions
44. 
 
 The economic case must reflect the need for capacity 
development, including training in low-resource settings, 
and the need for the evidence-based use of interventions 
across human and animal health care systems including 
medicines, diagnostic tools and vaccines.
45. 
 
 Economic impact assessments are needed on the health 
and broader socioeconomic burden of antimicrobial 
resistance, and should compare the cost of doing nothing 
against the cost and benefit of action. Lack of such data 
hindered implementation of the 2001 Global Strategy 
for Containment of Antimicrobial Resistance.13 The few 
studies on the economic cost of antimicrobial resistance 
are limited chiefly to developed countries.
46. 
 
 Investment in the development of new antimicrobial 
medicines, as well as in diagnostic tools and vaccines, 
is needed urgently. Lack of such investment reflects, in part, 
fears that resistance will develop rapidly and that returns 
on investment will be limited because of restrictions in 
use. Thus research and development of new antibiotics 
is seen as a less attractive business investment than that 
of medicines for chronic diseases. Currently most major 
pharmaceutical companies have stopped research in this 
area, a situation described by WHO s Consultative Expert 
Working Group on Research and Development: Financing 
and Coordination14 as a serious market failure and a 
particular cause for concern . New processes are needed 
both to facilitate renewed investment in research and 
development of new antibiotics, and to ensure that use of 
new products is governed by a public health framework of 
stewardship that conserves the effectiveness and longevity 
of such products. The cost of investment in research and 
development may need to be de-linked from price and 
the volume of sales to facilitate equitable and affordable 
access to new medicines, diagnostic tools, vaccines 
and other results from research and development in all 
countries. Many forums have been created in recent years 
to discuss these issues.15
47. 
 
 Antibiotics must also be supplemented by affordable, 
point-of-care diagnostic tools to inform health practitioners 
and veterinarians of the susceptibility of the pathogens 
to available antibiotics. The applicability and affordability 
of these techniques in low- and middle-income countries 
must be considered.
13 Implementation workshop on the WHO global strategy for containment of 
antimicrobial resistance. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2003.
14 Research and development to meet health needs in developing countries: 
strengthening global financing and coordination. Report of the consultative 
expert working group on research and development: financing and coordination. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
15 Several existing initiatives were reviewed at WHO s Technical Consultation on 
Innovative Models for New Antibiotics Development and Preservation (Geneva, 
13 May 2014) (http://www.who.int/phi/implementation/consultation_imnadp/en/, 
accessed 20 November 2014).

GLOBAL ACTION PLAN ON ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
12
48. 
 
 The framework presented below tabulates the actions 
that the Member States, Secretariat and international and 
national partners need to take in order to attain the goal 
and meet the objectives of the global plan.
49. 
 
 All Member States are urged to have in place, within two 
years of the endorsement of the action plan by the Health 
Assembly, national action plans on antimicrobial resistance 
that are aligned with the global action plan and with 
standards and guidelines established by intergovernmental 
bodies such as the Codex Alimentarius Commission, 
FAO and OIE. These national action plans should provide the 
basis for an assessment of the resource needs, take into 
account national and regional priorities, and address 
relevant national and local governance arrangements. 
The Secretariat will facilitate this work by:
`
` Supporting countries to develop, implement and 
monitor national plans;
`
` Leading and coordinating support to countries for 
assessment and implementation of investment 
needs, consistent with the principle of sustainability 
(subparagraph 21(4) above);
`
` Monitoring development and implementation of action 
plans by Member States and other partners;
`
` Publishing biennial progress reports, including an 
assessment of countries and organizations that have 
plans in place, their progress in implementation, and the 
effectiveness of action at regional and global levels; 
and including an assessment of progress made by 
FAO, OIE and WHO in implementing actions undertaken 
within the organizations tripartite collaboration will 
also be included in these reports.
50. 
 
 The Secretariat will also work with the Strategic and 
Technical Advisory Group on antimicrobial resistance, 
Member States, FAO and OIE, and other relevant partners 
to develop a framework for monitoring and evaluation, 
including the identification of measurable indicators of 
implementation and effectiveness of the global action 
plan. Examples of such indicators of effectiveness (impact) 
that could be applied for each of the strategic objectives 
are shown in the tabulated framework.
Framework for action on antimicrobial resistance

13
Objective 1: Improve awareness and understanding of antimicrobial resistance through effective 
communication, education and training
Potential measures of effectiveness: extent of reduction in global human consumption of antibiotics (with allowance for 
the need for improved access in some settings), and reduction in the volume of antibiotic use in food production
 I. Member State action
II. Secretariat action
III. International and national 
partners action
i. Increase national awareness of 
antimicrobial resistance through public 
communication programmes that target 
the different audiences in human health, 
animal health and agricultural practice, 
including participation in an annual world 
antibiotic awareness campaign.
ii. Establish antimicrobial resistance 
as a core component of professional 
education, training, certification 
and development for the health and 
veterinary sectors and 
agricultural practice.
iii. Include antimicrobial use and 
resistance in school curricula in order 
to promote better understanding and 
awareness, and provide the public media 
with accurate and relevant information 
so that public information and reporting 
reinforce key messages.
iv. Recognize antimicrobial resistance 
as a priority need for action across all 
government ministries through inclusion 
in national risk registers or other effective 
mechanisms for cross- 
government commitment.
v. Promote and support establishment 
of multisectoral (one-health) coalitions to 
address antimicrobial resistance at local 
or national level, and participation in 
such coalitions at regional and 
global levels.
i. Develop and implement global 
communication programmes and 
campaigns, including an annual world 
antibiotic awareness campaign, building 
on existing regional and national 
campaigns and in partnership with 
other organizations (e.g. UNESCO and 
UNICEF). Provide core communication 
materials and tools (including those for 
social media and for assessing public 
awareness and understanding) that can 
be adapted and implemented by Member 
States and others.
ii. Develop, with FAO and OIE through 
the tripartite collaboration, core 
communication, education and training 
materials that can be adapted and 
implemented regionally and nationally, 
on subjects that include the need for 
responsible use of antibiotics, the 
importance of infection prevention 
in human and animal health and 
agricultural practice, and measures to 
control spread of resistant organisms 
through food and the environment. 
Provide support to Member States 
with the integration of education on 
antimicrobial resistance into professional 
training, education and registration.
iii. Publish regular reports on progress 
in implementing the global action plan 
and progress towards meeting impact 
targets, in order to maintain commitment 
to reducing antimicrobial resistance.
iv. Maintain antimicrobial resistance 
as a priority for discussion with Member 
States through the regional committees, 
the Executive Board and Health Assembly, 
and with other intergovernmental 
organizations, including the 
United Nations.
i. Professional organizations and 
societies should establish antimicrobial 
resistance as a core component of 
education, training, examination, 
professional registration or certification, 
and professional development.
ii. OIE should continue to support its 
members in implementing OIE standards 
including veterinary professional 
standards and training, applying its 
Performance of Veterinary Services 
Pathway16 and updating of legislation.
iii. FAO should support awareness-
raising on antimicrobial resistance 
and promote good animal production 
and hygiene practices among animal 
production and health workers, animal 
producers, and other stakeholders in the 
food and agriculture sectors.
iv. Intergovernmental organizations, 
including FAO, OIE and the World 
Bank, should raise awareness and 
understanding of antimicrobial resistance 
and, in collaboration with WHO, should 
mirror the actions of the Secretariat 
within their constituencies.
v. Other stakeholders including 
civil society organizations, trade and 
industry bodies, employee organizations, 
foundations with an interest in science 
education, and the media should 
help to promote public awareness and 
understanding of infection prevention 
and use of antimicrobial medicines 
across all sectors.
vi. WHO, FAO, OIE and other 
international stakeholders should 
encourage and support Member States 
in forging in-country as well as regional/
global coalitions and alliances.
16 See: http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/ (accessed 20 November 2014).

GLOBAL ACTION PLAN ON ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
14
Objective 2: Strengthen the knowledge and evidence base through surveillance and research
Potential measure of effectiveness: extent of reduction in the prevalence of antimicrobial resistance, based on data 
collected through integrated programmes for surveillance of antimicrobial resistance in all countries
 I. Member State action
II. Secretariat action
III. International and national 
partners action
i. Develop a national surveillance 
system for antimicrobial 
resistance that:
 
 includes a national reference 
centre with the ability systematically 
to collect and analyse data 
including those on a core set 
of organisms and antimicrobial 
medicines from both health care 
facilities and the community in 
order to inform national policies and 
decision-making;
 
 includes at least one reference 
laboratory capable of susceptibility 
testing to fulfil the core data 
requirements, using standardized 
tests for identification of resistant 
microorganisms and operating to 
agreed quality standards;
 
 strengthens surveillance in 
animal health and agriculture 
sectors by implementation of the 
recommendations of the WHO 
Advisory Group on Integrated 
Surveillance of Antimicrobial 
Resistance for antimicrobial 
susceptibility testing of foodborne 
pathogens,17 the standards 
published in the OIE terrestrial and 
aquatic animal codes including 
the monitoring of resistance and 
antimicrobial use;18,19 the FAO/
WHO Codex Alimentarius Code of 
Practice to Minimize and Contain 
Antimicrobial Resistance20 and the 
Codex Alimentarius Guidelines for 
Risk Analysis of Foodborne 
Antimicrobial Resistance;
i. Develop and implement a 
global programme for surveillance of 
antimicrobial resistance in human health, 
including surveillance and reporting 
standards and tools, case definitions, 
external quality assessment schemes, 
and a network of WHO Collaborating 
Centres to support surveillance of 
antimicrobial resistance and external 
quality assessment in each WHO region.
ii. Develop, in consultation with 
Member States and other multisectoral 
stakeholders, standards for the reporting, 
sharing and publication of data on 
antimicrobial resistance that take into 
account established practices for global 
disease surveillance and reporting, as 
well as legal and ethical requirements.
iii. Report regularly on global and 
regional trends in the prevalence of 
antimicrobial resistance in human health.
iv. Work with FAO and OIE, within 
the tripartite collaboration, to support 
integrated surveillance and reporting 
of antimicrobial resistance in human 
and animal health and agriculture, and 
develop measures of antimicrobial 
resistance in the food chain for use as 
indicators of risk to human health.
v. Develop a framework for monitoring 
and reporting on antimicrobial 
consumption in human health, including 
standards for collection and reporting of 
data on use in different settings, building 
on the work of OECD.21
vi. With FAO and OIE, within the tripartite 
collaboration, collect, consolidate 
and publish information on the global 
consumption of antimicrobial medicines.
i. FAO, with WHO, should review and 
update regularly the FAO/WHO Codex 
Alimentarius Code of Practice to minimize 
and contain antimicrobial resistance and 
the Codex Alimentarius guidelines for 
risk analysis of foodborne 
antimicrobial resistance.
ii. The international research 
community and FAO should support 
studies to improve understanding of 
the impact of antimicrobial resistance 
on agriculture, animal production and 
food security, as well as the impacts of 
agricultural practices on development 
and spread of antimicrobial resistance, 
and to reduce non-therapeutic use 
of antimicrobial agents in agriculture 
through the development of sustainable 
husbandry practices.
iii. OIE should regularly update 
the terrestrial and aquatic animal 
codes (particularly with reference to 
antimicrobial resistance), revise the 
guideline on laboratory methods for 
bacterial antimicrobial susceptibility 
testing, and support the establishment of 
veterinary laboratory services through its 
Performance of Veterinary 
Services Pathway.
iv. Global health donors, international 
development bodies, and aid and 
technical agencies should support 
developing countries to build capacity 
to collect and analyse data on the 
prevalence of antimicrobial resistance 
and share or report such data.
17 Integrated surveillance on antimicrobial resistance: guidance from a WHO advisory group. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013.
18 See document CAC/GL 77-2011 at: http://www.codexalimentarius.org/standards/list-of-standards/en/ (accessed 20 November 2014).
19 See: http://www.oie.int/en/our-scientific-expertise/veterinary-products/antimicrobials (accessed 20 November 2014).
20 See: http://www.codexalimentarius.org/committees-task-forces//?provide=committeeDetail&idList=6 (accessed 20 November 2014).
21 Prescribing in primary care. In: Health at a glance 2013: OECD Indicators. Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; 2013.

15
Objective 2 (cont.): Strengthen the knowledge and evidence base through surveillance and research
Potential measure of effectiveness: extent of reduction in the prevalence of antimicrobial resistance, based on data 
collected through integrated programmes for surveillance of antimicrobial resistance in all countries
 I. Member State action
II. Secretariat action
III. International and national 
partners action
 
 promotes participation in regional 
and global networks and sharing of 
information so that national, regional 
and global trends can be detected 
and monitored;
 
 has the capacity to detect and 
report newly emerged resistance 
that may constitute a public health 
emergency of international concern, 
as required under the International 
Health Regulations (2005).
ii. Collect and report data on use of 
antimicrobial agents in human and 
animal health and agriculture so that 
trends can be monitored and the impact 
of action plans assessed.
iii. Consider implementing an agreed 
global public health research agenda 
on antimicrobial resistance, including: 
research to promote responsible use 
of antimicrobial medicines; defining 
improved practices for preventing 
infection in human and animal health and 
agricultural practice; and encouraging 
development of novel diagnostic tools 
and antimicrobial medicines.
vii. Consult Member States and other 
multisectoral stakeholders for the 
development of a global public health 
research agenda for filling major gaps in 
knowledge on antimicrobial resistance, 
including methods to assess the health 
and economic burdens of antimicrobial 
resistance, cost effectiveness of actions, 
mechanisms of development and spread 
of resistance, and research to underpin 
development of new interventions, 
diagnostic tools and vaccines. Monitor 
and report on implementation of the 
research agenda, for instance through the 
use of WHO s Global Health Research and 
Development Observatory.
viii. Work with partners to establish a 
sustainable repository for information on 
antimicrobial resistance and on the use 
and efficacy of antimicrobial medicines 
that is integrated with the global health 
research and development observatory 
and with a programme for independent 
evidence assessment and evaluation.
v. Research funding organizations 
and foundations should support 
implementation of the agreed global 
public health research agenda on 
antimicrobial resistance.

GLOBAL ACTION PLAN ON ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
16
Objective 3: Reduce the incidence of infection through effective sanitation, hygiene and infection 
prevention measures
Potential measures of effectiveness: extent of reduction in the prevalence of preventable infections, and in particular 
the incidence of drug-resistant infections in health care settings
 I. Member State action
II. Secretariat action
III. International and national 
partners action
i. Member States may consider the 
following actions:
 
 take urgent action to implement 
and strengthen hygiene and infection 
prevention and control;
 
 include training and education in 
hygiene and infection prevention and 
control as core (mandatory) content 
in training and education for health 
care and veterinary professionals 
and in their continuing professional 
development and accreditation 
or registration.
 
 develop or strengthen national 
policies and standards of practice 
regarding infection prevention and 
control activities in health facilities 
and monitor implementation of and 
adherence to these national policies 
and standards.
ii. Include within national surveillance 
of antimicrobial resistance the collection 
and reporting of data on antimicrobial 
susceptibility of microorganisms causing 
health care- 
associated infections.
iii. Strengthen animal health 
and agricultural practices through 
implementation of the standards 
published in the OIE Terrestrial and 
Aquatic Animal Health Codes22 and FAO/
WHO Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice 
to Minimize and Contain Antimicrobial 
Resistance.23
iv. Promote vaccination as a method of 
reducing infections in food animals.
i. Facilitate the design and 
implementation of policies and tools 
to strengthen hygiene and infection 
prevention and control practices, 
particularly to counter antimicrobial 
resistance, and promote the engagement 
of civil society and patient groups in 
improving practices in hygiene and 
infection prevention and control.
ii. Ensure that policy recommendations 
for new and existing vaccines take 
into account the prospects for 
restricted treatment options because 
of antimicrobial resistance, and the 
additional benefits of reduced 
use of antimicrobial agents, 
including antibiotics.
iii. Work with partners and other 
organizations to facilitate the 
development and clinical evaluation 
of specific priority vaccines for the 
prevention of difficult-to-treat or 
untreatable infections.
iv. Work with FAO and OIE, within 
the tripartite collaboration, to develop 
recommendations for the use of vaccines 
in food-producing animals, including 
recommendations for new vaccines, as 
a means to prevent foodborne diseases 
in humans and animals and reduce 
antimicrobial use.
i. Professional societies and 
accreditation bodies should support 
training and education on infection-
prevention measures as a mandatory 
requirement in professional development, 
accreditation and registration.
ii. OIE should update its codes 
and manuals to take account of new 
developments in vaccines.
iii. FAO should continue to engage and 
support producers and stakeholders 
in the food and agriculture sectors 
in adopting good practices in animal 
husbandry and health aimed at reducing 
the use of antibiotics and the risk of 
development and spread of 
antimicrobial resistance.
22 See: http://www.oie.int/en/our-scientific-expertise/veterinary-products/antimicrobials (accessed 20 November 2014).
23 See: http://www.codexalimentarius.org/committees-task-forces//?provide=committeeDetail&idList=6 (accessed 29 October 2014).

17
Objective 4: Optimize the use of antimicrobial medicines in human and animal health
Potential measure of effectiveness: extent of reduction in global human consumption of antibiotics (with allowance 
for the need for improved access in some settings), the consumption of antibiotics used in food production (terrestrial 
and aquatic livestock, and other agricultural practices), and the use of medical and veterinary antimicrobial agents for 
applications other than human and animal health
 I. Member State action
II. Secretariat action
III. International and national 
partners action
i. Develop and implement 
comprehensive action plans on 
antimicrobial resistance that incorporate 
the following elements:
 
 distribution, prescription, and 
dispensing of antimicrobials is carried 
out by accredited health or veterinary 
professionals under statutory body 
supervision or other suitably trained 
person authorized in accordance with 
national legislation;
 
 marketing authorization is given 
only to antimicrobial agents that are 
quality assured, safe and efficacious;
 
 development and implementation 
of national and institutional 
essential medicine lists guided by 
the WHO Model Lists of Essential 
Medicines, reimbursement lists and 
standard treatment guidelines to 
guide purchasing and prescribing 
of antimicrobial medicines, and 
regulation and control of promotional 
practices by industry;
 
 laboratory capacity to identify 
pathogens and their antimicrobial 
susceptibility in order to guide 
optimal use of antimicrobial 
medicines in clinical practice;
 
 provision of stewardship 
programmes that monitor and 
promote optimization of antimicrobial 
use at national and local levels 
in accordance with international 
standards in order to ensure the 
correct choice of medicine at the right 
dose on the basis of evidence;
 
 identification and elimination of 
economic incentives in all sectors 
that encourage inappropriate use of 
antimicrobial agents, and introduction 
of incentives to optimize use;
i. Strengthen and align, within the 
tripartite collaboration with FAO and 
OIE, the concepts of critically important 
antibiotics for human and animal health, 
and ensure that these concepts include 
use of new antibiotics so that a common 
position on restriction of antimicrobial 
medicines for human use can 
be established.
ii. Provide support to Member States 
in the development and enforcement of 
relevant regulations so that only, quality 
assured, safe and effective antimicrobial 
products reach users.
iii. Develop technical guidelines 
and standards to support access to, 
and evidence-based selection and 
responsible use of, antimicrobial 
medicines, including follow-up to 
treatment failure.
iv. Provide leadership to strengthen 
medicines regulatory systems at national 
and regional levels, so that appropriate 
practices for optimizing use of 
antimicrobial medicines are supported by 
appropriate and enforceable regulation, 
and that promotional practices can be 
adequately regulated.
v. Consult with Member States and 
pharmaceutical industry associations 
on innovative regulatory mechanisms 
for new antimicrobial medicines, for 
example considering them as a class 
of medicine that will require a different 
set of regulatory controls, and on new 
approaches to product labelling that 
focus on public health needs rather than 
marketing claims, in order to address the 
need for preservation of effectiveness 
and for global access.
i. OIE should regularly update its 
Terrestrial and Aquatic Animal Health 
Codes, particularly with reference to 
antimicrobial resistance.
ii. FAO, in collaboration with WHO, 
should regularly review and update 
the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Code 
of Practice to Minimize and Contain 
Antimicrobial Resistance to take into 
account not only residues in food but also 
the need for standards to minimize and 
control use of antimicrobial agents in 
agricultural practice.
iii. OIE, supported by FAO and WHO 
within the tripartite collaboration, should 
build and maintain a global database on 
the use of antimicrobial medicines 
in animals.
iv. The research community in both the 
public and private sectors, including the 
pharmaceutical industry, should invest 
in the development of effective and 
low-cost tools for diagnosis of infectious 
diseases and antimicrobial susceptibility 
testing for use in human and animal 
health at points of care and 
dispensing (pharmacies).
v. Donors, philanthropic and other 
nongovernmental organizations and civil 
society should ensure that their efforts 
to increase access to antimicrobial 
medicines are accompanied by measures 
to protect the continued efficacy of 
such medicines.

GLOBAL ACTION PLAN ON ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
18
Objective 4 (cont.): Optimize the use of antimicrobial medicines in human and animal health
Potential measure of effectiveness: extent of reduction in global human consumption of antibiotics (with allowance 
for the need for improved access in some settings), the consumption of antibiotics used in food production (terrestrial 
and aquatic livestock, and other agricultural practices), and the use of medical and veterinary antimicrobial agents for 
applications other than human and animal health
 I. Member State action
II. Secretariat action
III. International and national 
partners action
 
 effective and enforceable 
regulation and governance for 
licensing, distribution, use and quality 
assurance of antimicrobial medicines 
in human and animal health, 
including a regulatory framework for 
preservation of new antibiotics;
 
 policies on use of antimicrobial 
agents in terrestrial and aquatic 
animals and agriculture, 
including: implementation of Codex 
Alimentarius and OIE international 
standards and guidelines as well 
as WHO/OIE guidance on the use 
of critically important antibiotics; 
phasing out of use of antibiotics 
for animal growth promotion and 
crop protection in the absence 
of risk analysis; and reduction in 
nontherapeutic use of antimicrobial 
medicines in animal health.
vi. Develop standards and guidance 
(within the tripartite collaboration with 
FAO and OIE), based on best available 
evidence of harms, for the presence of 
antimicrobial agents and their residues 
in the environment, especially in water, 
wastewater and food (including aquatic 
and terrestrial animal feed).
vi. Professional bodies and 
associations, including industry 
associations, health insurance providers 
and other payers, should develop a 
code of conduct for appropriate training 
in, education about, and marketing, 
purchasing, reimbursement and use of 
antimicrobial agents. This code should 
include commitment to comply with 
national and international regulations 
and standards, and to eliminate 
dependence on the pharmaceutical 
industry for information and education on 
medicines and, in some cases, income.
 

19
24 Research and development to meet health needs in developing countries: strengthening global financing and coordination. Report of the consultative expert working group 
on research and development: financing and coordination. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
25 Many of the actions that can support affordable and equitable access to medicines are set out in the Global strategy and plan of action on public health, innovation and 
intellectual property. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011.
Objective 5: Develop the economic case for sustainable investment that takes account of the needs of all 
countries, and increase investment in new medicines, diagnostic tools, vaccines and other interventions
Potential measures of effectiveness: extent of increase in sustainable investment in capacity to counter antimicrobial 
resistance for all countries, including investment in development of new medicines, diagnostics and other interventions
 I. Member State action
II. Secretariat action
III. International and national 
partners action
i. Member States should 
consider assessing investment 
needs for implementation of 
their national action plans on 
antimicrobial resistance, and 
should develop plans to secure 
and apply the required financing.
ii. Member States are 
encouraged to participate in 
international collaborative research 
to support the development of new 
medicines, diagnostic tools and 
vaccines through:
 
 prioritization and support 
of basic scientific research 
on infectious diseases, and 
promoting partnerships 
between research institutions in 
developed and 
developing countries;
 
 collaboration, based on 
fair and equitable benefit 
sharing as mutually agreed, 
in the investigation of natural 
sources of biodiversity and 
biorepositories as sources for 
the development of 
new antibiotics;
 
 strengthening existing and 
creating new public-private 
partnerships for encouraging 
research and development of 
new antimicrobial agents 
and diagnostics;
 
 piloting of innovative 
ideas for financing research 
and development and for the 
adoption of new market models 
to encourage investment 
and ensure access to new 
antimicrobial products.
i. Work with the United Nations Secretary-General 
and bodies in the United Nations system to identify the 
best mechanism(s) to realize the investment needed 
to implement the global action plan on antimicrobial 
resistance, particularly with regard to the needs of 
developing countries.
ii. Work with the World Bank and with other 
development banks to develop and implement a 
template or models to estimate the investment needed 
to implement national action plans on antimicrobial 
resistance, and to collate and summarize these needs.
iii. Work with the World Bank and with FAO and 
OIE, within the tripartite collaboration, to assess the 
economic impact of antimicrobial resistance and of 
implementation of the action plan in animal health 
and agriculture.
iv. Explore with Member States, intergovernmental 
organizations, industry associations and other 
stakeholders, options for the establishment of a new 
partnership or partnerships: 
 
 to coordinate the work of many unlinked 
initiatives aiming to renew investment in research 
and development of antibiotics (including follow-
up initiatives from the Consultative Expert Working 
Group on Research and Development24);
 
 to identify priorities for new treatments, 
diagnostics and vaccines on the basis of 
emergence and prevalence of serious or life-
threatening infections caused by 
resistant pathogens;
 
 to act as the vehicle(s) for securing and 
managing investment in new medicines, 
diagnostics, vaccines and other interventions;
 
 to facilitate affordable and equitable access to 
existing and new medicines25 and other products 
while ensuring their proper and optimal use;
 
 to establish open collaborative models of 
research and development in a manner that will 
support access to the knowledge and products 
from such research, and provide incentives 
for investment.
i. Partners in the finance and 
economic sectors should define 
the economic case for national and 
global investment in combating 
antimicrobial resistance, including 
an assessment of the cost of 
implementing this action plan 
and the consequential cost of no 
action; this work could be led by 
the World Bank. 
ii. FAO, OIE and other partners 
should support appropriate 
analyses to establish the case 
for investment and to inform 
the selection of interventions 
to improve animal husbandry, 
management, health, hygiene 
and biosecurity practices aimed 
at reducing antimicrobial use 
(and antimicrobial resistance) in 
different production settings.

ISBN 978 92 4 150976 3
World Health Organization
Avenue Appia 20
1211 Geneva
Switzerland