WHO recommendations 
for the prevention 
and treatment of 
postpartum haemorrhage

 

WHO recommendations for the 
prevention and treatment of 
postpartum haemorrhage

WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
 
WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage.
 
1.Postpartum hemorrhage prevention and control. 2.Postpartum hemorrhage therapy. 
 
3.Obstetric labor complications. 4.Guideline. I.World Health Organization.
 
ISBN 978 92 4 154850 2 
 
(NLM classification: WQ 330)
 World Health Organization 2012
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO web site 
(www.who.int) or can be purchased from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 
Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; e-mail: bookorders@who.int). 
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications whether for sale or for noncom 
mercial distribution should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO web site (http://www.who.int/
about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal 
status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its 
frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not 
yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers products does not imply that they are en 
dorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that 
are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished 
by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information 
contained in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of 
any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material 
lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from 
its use. 
Printed in Italy

Contents
Acknowledgements 
1
Abbreviations 
2
Executive summary 
3
Box A: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH 
5
Box B: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH 
6
Box C: Recommendations on organization of care 
7
1. Background 
8
2. Methods 
9
3. Results 
12
Box 1: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH uterotonics 
15
Box 2: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH cord management 
and uterine massage 
16
Table 1: Recommendation status of the individual components of 
the active management of the third stage of labour, based on who 
delivers the intervention 
18
Box 3: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH in caesarean sections 
18
Box 4: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH uterotonics 
19
Box 5: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH fluid resuscitation 
and tranexamic acid 
19
Box 6: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH manoeuvres and 
other procedures 
20
Box 7: Recommendations for the treatment of retained placenta 
21
Box 8: Health Systems and Organization of Care recommendations 
22
Box 9: Statements related to topics for which there is insufficient 
evidence to issue a recommendation 
23
4. Research implications 
24
5. Dissemination and implementation of the guideline 
25
6. Applicability issues 
26
7. Updating the guideline 
27
References 
27
Annex 1. External experts, WHO staff involved in the preparation of 
the guideline, and summary of declarations of interest 
29
Annex 2. Critical outcomes for decision making 
33
Annex 3: Summary of the considerations related to the strength of the recom 
mendations (Balance Worksheets) 
34
Box 1. Summary of considerations related to the strength of 
the recommendations (Recommendations 1 5) 
34

The standardized criteria used in grading the evidence, the narrative summaries of 
evidence and GRADE tables are not included in this document. This material has 
been published in a separate document entitled WHO recommendations for post 
partum haemorrhage: evidence base and can be accessed online at: www.who.int/
reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perinatal_health/9789241548502/en/
Box 2. Summary of considerations related to the strength of 
the recommendations (Recommendations 6 10) 
35
Box 3. Summary of considerations related to the strength of 
the recommendations (Recommendations 11 15) 
36
Box 4. Summary of considerations related to the strength of 
the recommendations (Recommendations 16 20) 
37
Box 5. Summary of considerations related to the strength of 
the recommendations (Recommendations 21 25) 
38
Box 6. Summary of considerations related to the strength of 
the recommendations (Recommendations 26 30) 
39
Box 7. Summary of considerations related to the strength of 
the recommendations (Recommendations 31 32) 
40
Box 8. Template for the summary of considerations related to 
the strength of the recommendations with explanations for 
completing the template 
41

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
1
Acknowledgements
Work on this guideline was initiated by A. Metin G lmezoglu and Jo o Paulo Souza, 
of the WHO Department of Reproductive Health and Research, and by Matthews 
Mathai, of the WHO Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health. 
Jo o Paulo Souza coordinated the development of the present guideline and drafted 
this document. Edgardo Abalos and Virginia Diaz, of the Centro Rosarino de Estudios 
Perinatales (CREP), Rosario, Argentina, reviewed the scientific evidence related to 
the prevention and treatment of Postpartum Haemorrhage (PPH) and produced the 
GRADE tables used in this guideline. Natasha Hezelgrave, of the Academic Women s 
Health Centre, King s College London (KCL), United Kingdom (UK), drafted the nar 
rative summaries of evidence. The GRADE tables were double-checked by Kanokwa 
roon Watananirun (Fon) of the University of Bangkok, Thailand. A. Metin G lmezo 
glu, Matthews Mathai and Edgardo Abalos commented on the draft document before 
it was reviewed by Natasha Hezelgrave and participants at the WHO Technical 
Consultation on the Prevention and Treatment of PPH (see Annex 1). 
Thanks to Zahida Qureshi, of the University of Nairobi, Kenya, for serving as the 
Chairperson of the Technical Consultation. We acknowledge gratefully the valuable 
feedback given by a large number of international stakeholders during the online 
consultation which took place as part of this process.
WHO is grateful for the continued support of the United States Agency for Inter 
national Development (USAID) in this area of work. Special thanks are also due to 
Gynuity Health Projects for providing additional financial support for this guideline 
work. WHO also wishes to thank the authors of the systematic reviews used in this 
guideline for their assistance and collaboration in updating them. WHO is also grate 
ful to the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group, especially the staff at their 
Liverpool office in the United Kingdom, for their support in updating the Cochrane 
reviews.

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
2
Abbreviations
AGREE 
Appraisal of Guidelines Research and Evaluation
AMTSL 
Active Management of the Third Stage of Labour
CCT 
Controlled Cord Traction 
CI 
Confidence Interval
GREAT 
Guideline development, Research priorities, Evidence synthesis, 
 
Applicability of evidence, Transfer of knowledge (a WHO project)
GDG 
Guideline Development Group
GRADE 
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation
HIV 
Human immunodeficiency virus
IM 
Intramuscular
IU 
International Unit
IV 
Intravenous
MCA 
Maternal, Child and Adolescent Department
 g 
Microgram 
MMR 
Maternal Mortality Ratio
PICO 
Population, Interventions, Comparisons, and Outcomes
PO 
Per Os (orally)
PPH 
Postpartum Haemorrhage
RCT 
Randomized Controlled Trial
RevMan 
Review Manager (software)
RR 
Relative Risk
OR 
Odds Ratio
USAID 
United States Agency for International Development

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
3
Executive summary
Introduction
Postpartum Haemorrhage (PPH) is commonly defined as a blood loss of 500 ml or 
more within 24 hours after birth. PPH is the leading cause of maternal mortality in 
low-income countries and the primary cause of nearly one quarter of all maternal 
deaths globally. Most deaths resulting from PPH occur during the first 24 hours after 
birth: the majority of these could be avoided through the use of prophylactic utero 
tonics during the third stage of labour and by timely and appropriate management. 
Improving health care for women during childbirth in order to prevent and treat PPH 
is an essential step towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. 
The primary objective of this guideline therefore is to provide a foundation for the 
strategic policy and programme development needed to ensure the sustainable 
implementation of effective interventions for reducing the global burden of PPH. 
Guideline development methods
The procedures used in the development of this guideline are outlined in the WHO 
handbook for guideline development 1. Briefly, these procedures are: (i) the identi 
fication of questions related to clinical practice and health policy for which answers 
are needed, (ii) the retrieval of up-to-date research-based evidence, (iii) the as 
sessment and synthesis of evidence, (iv) the formulation of recommendations using 
input from a wide range of stakeholders, and (v) the formulation of plans for the 
dissemination, implementation, impact evaluation and updating of the guideline. 
The scientific evidence for the recommendations was synthesized using the Grading 
of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) methodol 
ogy. For each of the previous WHO recommendations on PPH (2007 and 2009) and 
for all the newly-added questions, evidence profiles were prepared based on 22 
up-to-date systematic reviews. The revised and new recommendations were devel 
oped and adopted by an international group of experts who participated in the WHO 
Technical Consultation on the Prevention and Treatment of PPH, held in Montreux, 
Switzerland, 6 8 March 2012. 
The WHO Technical Consultation adopted 32 recommendations and these are shown 
in Boxes A, B and C. For each recommendation, the quality of the supporting evi 
dence is graded as very low , low , moderate or high . The contributing stake 
holders qualified the strength of these recommendations by taking the quality of the 
evidence and other factors into account (including the values and preferences of 
stakeholders, the magnitude of effect, the balance of benefits versus disadvantages, 
resource usage, and the feasibility of each recommendation). To ensure that each 
recommendation is correctly understood and used in practice, additional remarks 
have also been included, and these are noted in the full document below the recom 
mendations. Readers should refer to these remarks in the full version of the guide 
line if they are in any doubt about the meaning of each recommendation.
1 WHO handbook for guideline development. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
4
Recommendations for PPH prevention
The intrinsic contribution of each component of the active management of the 
third stage of labour was examined in light of new available evidence, and relevant 
recommendations were made. All women giving birth should be offered uterotonics 
during the third stage of labour for the prevention of PPH; oxytocin (IM/IV, 10 IU) 
is recommended as the uterotonic drug of choice. Other injectable uterotonics and 
misoprostol are recommended as alternatives for the prevention of PPH in settings 
where oxytocin is unavailable. The importance of controlled cord traction (CCT) was 
revisited because of new evidence. This intervention is now regarded as optional 
in settings where skilled birth attendants are available, and is contraindicated in 
settings where skilled attendants do not assist with births. Early cord clamping is 
generally contraindicated. Continuous uterine massage is not recommended as an 
intervention to prevent PPH in women who have received prophylactic oxytocin, 
as it may cause maternal discomfort, require a dedicated health professional, and 
may not lead to a reduction of blood loss. However, surveillance of uterine tonus 
through abdominal palpation is recommended in all women for early identification 
of postpartum uterine atony. In summary, the Guideline Development Group (GDG) 
considered the use of uterotonics as the main intervention within the active man 
agement of third stage of labour package. In this context, the use of misoprostol for 
the prevention of PPH by community health care workers and lay health workers is 
supported in settings where skilled birth attendants are not present.
The GDG also issued recommendations for reducing blood loss during the third stage 
of labour in caesarean sections. Oxytocin is the recommended uterotonic drug for 
the prevention of PPH in caesarean sections. Cord traction is recommended in pref 
erence to manual removal when assisting placental delivery in caesarean sections.
Recommendations for PPH treatment
The use of uterotonics (oxytocin alone as the first choice) plays a central role in 
the treatment of PPH. Uterine massage is recommended for the treatment of PPH 
as soon as it is diagnosed, and initial fluid resuscitation with isotonic crystalloids is 
recommended. The use of tranexamic acid is advised in cases of refractory atonic 
bleeding or persistent trauma-related bleeding. The use of intrauterine balloon 
tamponade is recommended for refractory bleeding or if uterotonics are unavail 
able. Bimanual uterine compression, external aortic compression, and the use of 
non-pneumatic anti-shock garments are recommended as temporizing measures until 
substantive care is available. If there is persistent bleeding and the relevant re 
sources are available, uterine artery embolization should be considered. If bleeding 
persists, despite treatment with uterotonic drugs and other conservative interven 
tions, surgical intervention should be used without further delay.
If the third stage of labour lasts more than 30 minutes, CCT and IV/IM oxytocin 
(10 IU) should be used to manage the retained placenta. If the placenta is retained 
and bleeding occurs, the manual removal of the placenta should be expedited. 
Whenever the manual removal of the placenta is undertaken, a single dose of pro 
phylactic antibiotics is recommended.
The GDG also issued recommendations related to the organization of PPH care. 
Health facilities delivering maternity services should adopt formal protocols for the 
prevention and treatment of PPH and for patient referral. The use of PPH treatment 

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
5
simulations for pre-service and in-service training programmes was recommended. 
Finally, the GDG recommended that the use of uterotonics for the prevention of PPH 
should be monitored and a specific indicator was suggested.
Box A: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH
1. The use of uterotonics for the prevention of PPH during the third stage of labour is recom 
mended for all births. (Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
2. Oxytocin (10 IU, IV/IM) is the recommended uterotonic drug for the prevention of PPH. 
(Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
3. In settings where oxytocin is unavailable, the use of other injectable uterotonics (if appro 
priate ergometrine/methylergometrine or the fixed drug combination of oxytocin and ergo 
metrine) or oral misoprostol (600 g) is recommended. (Strong recommendation, moderate-
quality evidence)
4. In settings where skilled birth attendants are not present and oxytocin is unavailable, the 
administration of misoprostol (600 g PO) by community health care workers and lay health 
workers is recommended for the prevention of PPH. (Strong recommendation, moderate-
quality evidence)
5. In settings where skilled birth attendants are available, CCT is recommended for vaginal 
births if the care provider and the parturient woman regard a small reduction in blood loss 
and a small reduction in the duration of the third stage of labour as important (Weak recom 
mendation, high-quality evidence) 
6. In settings where skilled birth attendants are unavailable, CCT is not recommended. (Strong 
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
7. Late cord clamping (performed after 1 to 3 minutes after birth) is recommended for all births 
while initiating simultaneous essential newborn care. (Strong recommendation, moderate-
quality evidence)
8. Early cord clamping (<1 minute after birth) is not recommended unless the neonate is as 
phyxiated and needs to be moved immediately for resuscitation. (Strong recommendation, 
moderate-quality evidence)
9. Sustained uterine massage is not recommended as an intervention to prevent PPH in women 
who have received prophylactic oxytocin. (Weak recommendation, low-quality evidence)
10. Postpartum abdominal uterine tonus assessment for early identification of uterine atony is 
recommended for all women. (Strong recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
11. Oxytocin (IV or IM) is the recommended uterotonic drug for the prevention of PPH in caesar 
ean section. (Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
12. Controlled cord traction is the recommended method for removal of the placenta in caesar 
ean section. (Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
6
Box B: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH
13. Intravenous oxytocin alone is the recommended uterotonic drug for the treatment of PPH. 
(Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
14. If intravenous oxytocin is unavailable, or if the bleeding does not respond to oxytocin, the use 
of intravenous ergometrine, oxytocin-ergometrine fixed dose, or a prostaglandin drug (includ 
ing sublingual misoprostol, 800 g) is recommended. (Strong recommendation, low-quality 
evidence)
15. The use of isotonic crystalloids is recommended in preference to the use of colloids for the 
initial intravenous fluid resuscitation of women with PPH. (Strong recommendation, low-qual 
ity evidence)
16. The use of tranexamic acid is recommended for the treatment of PPH if oxytocin and other 
uterotonics fail to stop bleeding or if it is thought that the bleeding may be partly due to 
trauma. (Weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
17. Uterine massage is recommended for the treatment of PPH. (Strong recommendation, very-
low-quality evidence)
18. If women do not respond to treatment using uterotonics, or if uterotonics are unavailable, 
the use of intrauterine balloon tamponade is recommended for the treatment of PPH due to 
uterine atony. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
19. If other measures have failed and if the necessary resources are available, the use of uter 
ine artery embolization is recommended as a treatment for PPH due to uterine atony. (Weak 
recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
20. If bleeding does not stop in spite of treatment using uterotonics and other available conserva 
tive interventions (e.g. uterine massage, balloon tamponade), the use of surgical interven 
tions is recommended. (Strong recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
21. The use of bimanual uterine compression is recommended as a temporizing measure until ap 
propriate care is available for the treatment of PPH due to uterine atony after vaginal deliv 
ery. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
22. The use of external aortic compression for the treatment of PPH due to uterine atony after 
vaginal birth is recommended as a temporizing measure until appropriate care is available. 
(Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
23. The use of non-pneumatic anti-shock garments is recommended as a temporizing measure 
until appropriate care is available. (Weak recommendation, low-quality evidence)
24. The use of uterine packing is not recommended for the treatment of PPH due to uterine atony 
after vaginal birth. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
25. If the placenta is not expelled spontaneously, the use of IV/IM oxytocin (10 IU) in combina 
tion with controlled cord traction is recommended. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality 
evidence)
26. The use of ergometrine for the management of retained placenta is not recommended as this 
may cause tetanic uterine contractions which may delay the expulsion of the placenta. (Weak 
recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
27. The use of prostaglandin E2 alpha (dinoprostone or sulprostone) for the management of re 
tained placenta is not recommended. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
28. A single dose of antibiotics (ampicillin or first-generation cephalosporin) is recommended if 
manual removal of the placenta is practised. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evi 
dence)

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
7
Box C: Organization of care
29. The use of formal protocols by health facilities for the prevention and treatment of PPH is 
recommended. (Weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
30. The use of formal protocols for referral of women to a higher level of care is recommended 
for health facilities. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
31. The use of simulations of PPH treatment is recommended for pre-service and in-service train 
ing programmes. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
32. Monitoring the use of uterotonics after birth for the prevention of PPH is recommended as 
a process indicator for programmatic evaluation. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality 
evidence)

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
8
1. Background
Postpartum Haemorrhage (PPH) is commonly defined as a blood loss of 500 ml or 
more within 24 hours after birth, while severe PPH is defined as a blood loss of 
1000 ml or more within the same timeframe. PPH affects approximately 2% of all 
women who give birth: it is associated not only with nearly one quarter of all ma 
ternal deaths globally but is also the leading cause of maternal mortality in most 
low-income countries. PPH is a significant contributor to severe maternal morbidity 
and long-term disability as well as to a number of other severe maternal conditions 
generally associated with more substantial blood loss, including shock and organ dys 
function. (1 3)
Uterine atony is the most common cause of PPH, but genital tract trauma (i.e. vagi 
nal or cervical lacerations), uterine rupture, retained placental tissue, or maternal 
coagulation disorders may also result in PPH. Although the majority of women who 
experience PPH complications have no identifiable clinical or historical risk factors, 
grand multiparity and multiple gestation are associated with an increased risk of 
bleeding after birth. PPH may be aggravated by pre-existing anaemia and, in such 
instances, the loss of a smaller volume of blood may still result in adverse clinical 
sequelae. (4)
During the second half of the 20th century, a package of interventions performed 
during the third stage of labour became the cornerstone for the prevention of 
PPH. This approach became known as the active management of the third stage 
of labour and consisted initially of the following components: the administration 
of a prophylactic uterotonic after the delivery of a baby, early cord clamping and 
cutting, and the controlled traction of the umbilical cord. Uterine massage is also 
frequently included as part of the active management of the third stage of labour. 
In contrast to active management, expectant management involves instead waiting 
for signs of placenta separation and allows for the placenta to be delivered sponta 
neously, or aided by nipple stimulation or gravity. Compared with expectant man 
agement, the active management of the third stage of labour is associated with a 
substantial reduction in the occurrence of PPH. (5)
It is generally assumed that by preventing and treating PPH, most PPH-associated 
deaths could be avoided. The prevention and treatment of PPH are therefore 
vital steps towards improving the health care of women during childbirth and the 
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. To reach these objectives, 
health workers in developing countries should be given access to appropriate medi 
cations and be trained in procedures relevant to the management of PPH. Countries 
also need evidence-based guidance to inform their health policies and improve their 
health outcomes. 
Given the availability of new scientific evidence related to the prevention and treat 
ment of PPH, the aim of this document is to revise previous WHO recommendations 
for the prevention and treatment of PPH and to add new recommendations. The 
primary goal of this guideline is to provide a foundation for the implementation of 
strategic policy and programme developments for interventions shown to have been 
effective in reducing the burden of PPH. Health professionals responsible for de 
veloping national and local protocols and health policies constitute the main target 
audience of this document. Obstetricians, midwives, general medical practitioners, 
health care managers and public health policy-makers, particularly in under-re 

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
9
sourced settings are also targeted. The guidance provided is evidence-informed and 
covers topics related to the management of PPH that were selected and prioritized 
by an international, multidisciplinary group of health care workers, consumers and 
other stakeholders. This document establishes general principles of PPH care and it 
is intended to inform the development of protocols and health policies related to 
PPH. This document is not intended to provide a comprehensive practical guide for 
the prevention and treatment of PPH.
2. Methods
This guideline is an update of the WHO recommendations for the prevention of 
PPH published in 2007 and the WHO guidelines for the management of PPH and 
retained placenta published in 2009 (6,7). This document represents WHO s nor 
mative support for using evidence-informed policies and practices in all countries. 
The guideline forms part of a WHO knowledge-to-action project entitled GREAT 
(Guideline development, Research priorities, Evidence synthesis, Applicability of 
evidence, Transfer of knowledge) (8) and was developed using standardized operat 
ing procedures in accordance with the process described in the WHO handbook for 
guideline development (9). In summary, the process included: (i) the identification 
of critical questions and critical outcomes, (ii) the retrieval of the evidence, (iii) the 
assessment and synthesis of evidence, (iv) the formulation of recommendations, and 
(v) planning for the dissemination, implementation, impact evaluation and updating 
of the guideline.
Two technical groups have worked in the development of this guideline. A small 
operative group composed of staff from the WHO s Department of Reproductive 
Health and Research, and Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent 
Health (MCA), as well as two external experts (see Annex 1 The guideline steer 
ing group) and a larger group with international stakeholders including midwives, 
obstetricians, neonatologists, researchers, experts in research synthesis, experts in 
health care programmes, and consumer representatives (the Guideline Development 
Group GDG). The guideline steering group was formed in the very beginning of the 
project and reviewed the previous WHO guidelines on prevention and treatment of 
PPH (6,7). This group prepared a list of potential additional questions related to the 
prevention and treatment of PPH. Next, the GDG reviewed and prioritized the draft 
questions. The guideline steering group then produced a list of all the questions to 
be addressed. This included both questions from the earlier versions of the guideline 
as well as new ones. The guideline steering group also adopted the outcomes used 
in the 2007 and 2009 guideline documents. These outcomes, as before, were rated 
on a scale from 1 to 9. A question or outcome was defined as critical if it was given 
an average score of 7 or more. Questions and outcomes with a score of between 
4 and 6 were considered important but not critical , while those with a score lower 
than 4 were not considered to be important for the purposes of the guideline 
(Annex 2).

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
10
Cochrane systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) were the pri 
mary source of evidence for the recommendations2. Using the assembled list of 
questions and outcomes, the guideline steering group identified Cochrane systematic 
reviews that were either relevant or potentially relevant and then evaluated wheth 
er any needed updating. A review was considered to be outdated if the last specified 
date for new trial searches was two years ago or more, or if there were relevant 
studies still awaiting assessment, as identified by the standard search procedures of 
the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group. Updates were performed using spe 
cific standard search strategies. The corresponding authors of the outdated reviews 
were invited to update them within a specified time period. In instances in which 
the corresponding authors were unable to do so, the updates were undertaken by 
members of the guideline steering group. The search strategies employed to identify 
the trials and the specific criteria for trial inclusion and exclusion are described in 
the individual systematic reviews. A systematic review of literature that included 
non-randomized trials was carried out by the guideline steering group members 
when randomized-trial data related to specific questions were scarce.
The following procedures were used to extract the evidence for this guideline from 
each of these systematic reviews: first, the most recent version of the Review 
Manager (RevMan) file was retrieved from the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth 
Cochrane Group and customized to reflect the key comparisons and outcomes (those 
that were not relevant to the guideline were excluded). Then the RevMan file was 
exported to the GRADE profiler software (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation) and GRADE criteria were used to critically appraise the 
retrieved scientific evidence. Finally, evidence profiles (in the form of GRADE tables) 
were prepared for each comparison. An online content management system devel 
oped for the GREAT project, namely the Guideline Production System, was used to 
handle and share electronic files.
The evidence presented in the GRADE tables was derived from a larger body of data 
extracted primarily from Cochrane reviews which, in many cases, contained multiple 
comparisons (Evidence Base (EB) Tables 1 to 70). Each GRADE table relates to one 
specific question or comparison, but some GRADE tables do not contain data for all 
critical outcomes. This is because data for those outcomes were not available in the 
Cochrane reviews. The raw data which constitute the basis of the GRADE tables are 
not included in this document, but readers interested in how these GRADE tables 
were constructed may request access to this information. The guideline steering 
group used the information presented in the GRADE tables to check if any existing 
recommendations (included in the 2007 or 2009 documents) needed to be revised, 
and to draft recommendations that related to the new questions. Each recom 
mendation was allocated to a thematic module which included the narrative sum 
maries of evidence and the relevant GRADE tables. The standardized criteria used 
in grading the evidence and the thematic modules (including the GRADE tables) 
are not included in this document. They have been published separately online 
in a document entitled WHO recommendations for preventing and treating PPH: 
evidence base (www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perina 
tal_health/9789241548502/en).
2 As part of the Cochrane pre-publication editorial process, reviews are commented on by three peers 
(one editor and two referees external to the editorial team) and the Group s Statistical Adviser (see 
http://www.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews). The Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Inter 
ventions describes in detail the process of preparing and maintaining Cochrane systematic reviews on 
the effects of health care interventions.

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
11
A preliminary online consultation was held to review the draft recommendations. 
The draft recommendations and supporting evidence were made available to a large 
number of international stakeholders who were then asked to respond to an online 
survey. In addition, the preliminary online consultation identified other previous 
recommendations that needed to be discussed at the WHO Technical Consultation 
on the Prevention and Treatment of PPH held in Montreux, Switzerland, 6 8 March 
2012. A subset of the international group of experts (who had participated in the 
online consultations) and other additional experts were invited to attend the Techni 
cal Consultation (see Annex 1 for a full list of participants). The draft recommen 
dations, the narrative summaries of evidence, the GRADE tables for the new and 
previous recommendations, and other related documents were provided in advance 
to participants. Balance worksheets were used during the Technical Consultation to 
summarize the values, preferences and judgements made about the strength of the 
new and revised recommendations.
Declaration of interest by participants in the WHO Technical Con 
sultation
According to WHO regulations, all experts must declare their relevant interests prior 
to participation in WHO meetings. All GDG members and participants were therefore 
required to complete a Declaration of Interest Form before the meeting. These were 
reviewed by the guideline steering group before the group composition and invita 
tions were finalized. The external advisers also verbally declared potential conflicts 
of interest at the beginning of the meeting. The procedures for the management 
of conflicts of interests were undertaken in accordance with the WHO guidelines 
for declaration of interests (WHO experts) . In summary, all members of the GDG 
declared that they had no commercial or financial interests that were directly or 
indirectly related to the topic of the meeting/guideline. Seven members of the 
GDG were involved in academic work related to the topic of the guideline, but this 
involvement was not considered to be a conflict of interest and the full participation 
of all the selected experts was deemed appropriate. A table summarizing the decla 
rations of interest made by members of the GDG is included in Annex 1. 
Decision-making during the Technical Consultation
At the beginning of the Technical Consultation, the participants discussed and ad 
opted a list of recommendations which needed to be addressed during the meeting. 
This included the new recommendations as well as previous recommendations that 
needed to be reviewed and possibly revised.
The following protocol was used for the Technical Consultation: the meeting was 
structured to allow participants to discuss the proposed list of recommendations and 
these recommendations were revised, as needed, through group discussion. The final 
adoption of each recommendation was made by consensus defined as the agree 
ment by three quarters or more of the participants provided that those who dis 
agreed did not feel strongly about their position. Strong disagreements were record 
ed as such in the guideline. If the participants were unable to reach a consensus, 
the disputed recommendation, or any other decision, was put to a vote. A recom 
mendation or decision stood if a simple majority (more than half of the participants) 
voted in support of it, unless the disagreement related to a safety concern, in which 
case the WHO Secretariat would choose not to issue a recommendation at all. WHO 
staff attending the meeting, external technical experts involved in the collection 

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
12
and grading of the evidence, and observers were not eligible to vote. In addition to 
discussing the scientific evidence and its quality, relevant applicability issues, costs 
and other judgements were also taken into consideration when formulating the final 
recommendations.
The strength of each recommendation was determined during the Technical Con 
sultation. By default, the strength of the recommendations discussed was aligned 
initially with the quality of the evidence (i.e. at the start of the discussion, strong 
recommendations were based on evidence of moderate and high quality, while 
weak recommendations were based on evidence of low and very low quality). 
In addition to the quality of the evidence, the following factors were considered 
when determining the final recommendation and its strength: values and preferenc 
es, the magnitude of effect, the balance of benefits versus disadvantages, resource 
usage, and feasibility. Values and preferences, resource usage, and the feasibility of 
each recommendation were based on the experience and opinion of the GDG mem 
bers. Balance worksheets were used to note and synthesize these considerations 
(Annex 3, Boxes 1 to 8) and record the reasons for changes made to the default 
strength of the recommendations.
Document preparation and peer review
Prior to the Technical Consultation, the guideline steering group prepared a prelimi 
nary version of this document using a guideline reporting template which had been 
developed as part of the WHO s GREAT project. The draft guideline was reviewed by 
Technical Consultation participants at the meeting in Montreux. During the meeting, 
the draft guideline was modified in line with participant deliberation and comments. 
Feedback received during the preliminary online consultation was also discussed and 
incorporated into the document where appropriate. After the meeting, members of 
the guideline steering group worked to ensure that a revised version of the docu 
ment accurately reflected the deliberations and decisions of the participants. The 
revised draft guideline document was sent to two external peer reviewers and their 
inputs were carefully evaluated by the guideline steering group and document revi 
sions made accordingly. The guideline steering group refrained from making substan 
tive changes after the meeting in Montreux to the guideline scoping (such as the 
further expansion of the guideline scoping) or to the recommendations. The revised 
version was returned electronically to those who had attended the Technical Consul 
tation for their approval.
3. Results
This guideline includes 32 recommendations for the prevention and treatment of 
PPH. Seven of these recommendations are new, while the others have been revised 
in light of new evidence. Most of the previous 2007 and 2009 recommendations 
remain unchanged in essence, despite updates to the evidence base. The wording 
of the previous recommendations has been revised to enhance the clarity of the 
guidance provided. The recommendations included in this guideline are based on 
a total of 22 Cochrane systematic reviews summarized in 70 GRADE tables. Boxes 
1 to 8 present the most up-to-date WHO recommendations for the prevention and 
treatment of PPH. Where applicable, remarks related to specific recommendations 
are also shown in these boxes and new recommendations are marked with asterisks. 
Narrative summaries of evidence supporting the recommendations are presented 

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
13
in the electronic appendix together with the corresponding GRADE tables (see the 
 WHO recommendations for preventing and treating PPH: evidence base at 
www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perinatal_health/
9789241548502/en). Box 9 presents statements related to topics for which, accord 
ing to the assessments of the GDG, there was insufficient evidence to issue a recom 
mendation. Balance worksheets summarizing the values, preferences and judge 
ments made about the strength of the recommendations are presented in Annex 3, 
Boxes 1 to 8.
The development of these recommendations involved 130 stakeholders who par 
ticipated in the online preliminary survey (representing all WHO regions), and 25 
experts who participated in the WHO Technical Consultation.
Recommendations for PPH prevention
The contribution of each component of the active management of the third stage of 
labour was examined in light of new available evidence, and relevant recommenda 
tions were made. Box 1 presents recommendations concerning the use of uteroton 
ics for the prevention of PPH. All women giving birth should be offered uteroton 
ics during the third stage of labour to prevent PPH and IM/IV oxytocin (10 IU) is 
recommended as the uterotonic drug of choice. Other injectable uterotonics (i.e. 
ergometrine/methylergometrine, or the fixed drug combination of oxytocin and 
ergometrine) and misoprostol are recommended as alternatives for the prevention 
of PPH in settings where oxytocin is unavailable. Box 2 contains recommendations 
related to cord management and uterine massage. The importance of controlled 
cord traction (CCT) was revisited because of new evidence. This intervention is now 
regarded as optional in settings where skilled birth attendants are available, and 
is contraindicated in settings where skilled attendants do not assist with births. 
Early cord clamping is generally contraindicated. Continuous uterine massage is 
not recommended as an intervention to prevent PPH for women who have received 
prophylactic oxytocin, because the massage may cause maternal discomfort, re 
quire a dedicated health professional, and may not lead to a reduction of blood loss. 
However, surveillance of the uterine tonus through abdominal palpation is recom 
mended for all women for the early identification of postpartum uterine atony. Table 
1 summarizes the recommendation status of the individual components of the active 
management of the third stage of labour. In summary, the GDG considered the use 
of uterotonics as the main intervention within the active management of third stage 
of labour package. In this context, the use of misoprostol for the prevention of PPH 
by community health care workers and lay health workers is supported in settings 
where skilled birth attendants are not present.
Recommendations for reducing blood loss during the third stage of labour in caesar 
ean sections are presented in Box 3. Oxytocin is the recommended uterotonic drug 
for the prevention of PPH in caesarean sections. Cord traction is recommended in 
preference to manual removal when assisting placental delivery in caesarean sec 
tions.
Recommendations for PPH treatment
The use of uterotonics (oxytocin alone as the first choice) plays a central role in 
the treatment of PPH (see Boxes 4 and 5). Uterine massage is recommended for the 
treatment of PPH as soon as it is diagnosed (see Box 6) and the initial fluid resus 

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
14
citation with isotonic crystalloids is recommended. The use of tranexamic acid is 
advised in cases of refractory atonic bleeding or persistent trauma-related bleed 
ing (see Box 5). The use of intrauterine balloon tamponade is recommended for 
refractory bleeding or if uterotonics are unavailable. Bimanual uterine compression, 
external aortic compression, and the use of non-pneumatic anti-shock garments are 
recommended as temporizing measures until substantive care is available. If there is 
persistent bleeding and the relevant resources are available, uterine artery emboli 
zation should be considered. If bleeding persists despite treatment with uterotonic 
drugs and other conservative interventions, surgical intervention should be used 
without further delay.
If the third stage of labour lasts more than 30 minutes, CCT and IV/IM oxytocin 
(10 IU) should be used to manage the retained placenta. If the placenta is retained 
and bleeding occurs, the manual removal of the placenta should be expedited. 
Whenever the manual removal of the placenta is undertaken, a single dose of pro 
phylactic antibiotics is recommended (see Box 7).
The GDG also issued recommendations related to the organization of PPH care (see 
Box 8). Health facilities delivering maternity services should adopt formal proto 
cols for the prevention and treatment of PPH and for patient referral. The use of 
PPH treatment simulations for pre-service and in-service training programmes was 
recommended. Finally, the GDG recommended that the use of uterotonics for the 
prevention of PPH should be monitored and a specific indicator was suggested.
The GDG found insufficient evidence to recommend one route over another for the 
prevention of PPH with oxytocin, the use of recombinant factor VIIa for the treat 
ment of PPH, intraumbilical vein injection of oxytocin for treatment of retained 
placenta, and the antenatal distribution of misoprostol. The GDG also found insuffi 
cient evidence to recommend self-administration for the prevention of PPH and the 
measurement of blood loss over clinical estimation (see Box 9).

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
15
Box 1: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH uterotonics
1. The use of uterotonics for the prevention of PPH during the third stage of labour is recom 
mended for all births. (Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
2. Oxytocin (10 IU, IV/IM) is the recommended uterotonic drug for the prevention of PPH. 
(Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
3. In settings where oxytocin is unavailable, the use of other injectable uterotonics (e.g. er 
gometrine/methylergometrine or the fixed drug combination of oxytocin and ergometrine) 
or oral misoprostol (600 g) is recommended. (Strong recommendation, moderate-quality 
evidence)
4. In settings where skilled birth attendants are not present and oxytocin is unavailable, the 
administration of misoprostol (600 g PO) by community health care workers and lay health 
workers is recommended for the prevention of PPH. (Strong recommendation, moderate-
quality evidence)
Remarks
 
Available comparisons are limited, but a significant difference between the benefits of oxytocin and 
ergometrine is unlikely. These recommendations place a high value on avoiding the adverse effects of 
ergometrine and assume a similar benefit from using oxytocin and ergometrine for the prevention of 
PPH. 
 
Caution should be exercised when opting for ergot derivatives for the prevention of PPH as these drugs 
have clear contraindications in women with hypertensive disorders. Thus, it is probably safer to avoid 
the use of ergot derivatives in unscreened populations.
 
Misoprostol (600 
 g 
 PO) was regarded by the GDG as an effective drug for the prevention of PPH. How 
ever, the GDG considered the relative benefits of oxytocin compared to misoprostol in preventing blood 
loss, as well as the increased adverse effects of misoprostol compared to oxytocin. The GDG acknowl 
edged that there is no evidence to show that a 600 g dose of misoprostol provides greater efficacy over 
a 400 
 g g 
 dose. Lower doses have a lower side-effect profile but the efficacy of lower doses of miso 
prostol has not been evaluated sufficiently.
 
The recommendations concerning alternative uterotonics should not detract from the objective of mak 
ing oxytocin as widely accessible as possible.
 
In view of past concerns regarding the community-level distribution of misoprostol and the potential 
for serious consequences of administration before birth, the GDG places emphasis on training persons 
administering misoprostol and monitoring community distribution interventions with scientifically sound 
methods and appropriate indicators.

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
16
Box 2: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH cord management and uterine massage
5. In settings where skilled birth attendants are available, CCT is recommended for vaginal 
births if the care provider and the parturient woman regard a small reduction in blood loss 
and a small reduction in the duration of the third stage of labour as important. (Weak recom 
mendation, high-quality evidence) 
6. In settings where skilled birth attendants are unavailable, CCT is not recommended. (Strong 
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
7. Late cord clamping (performed approximately 1 to 3 minutes after birth) is recommended 
for all births while initiating simultaneous essential newborn care. (Strong recommendation, 
moderate-quality evidence)
8. Early cord clamping (<1 minute after birth) is not recommended unless the neonate is as 
phyxiated and needs to be moved immediately for resuscitation. (Strong recommendation, 
moderate quality evidence)
9. Sustained uterine massage is not recommended as an intervention to prevent PPH in women 
who have received prophylactic oxytocin. (Weak recommendation, low-quality evidence)
10. Postpartum abdominal uterine tonus assessment for early identification of uterine atony is 
recommended for all women. (Strong recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
Remarks
 
Recommendations 5 and 6 are based on a large RCT in which oxytocin 10 IU was used for the prevention 
of PPH in all participants. Based on this evidence, CCT was regarded as safe when applied by skilled 
birth attendants as it provides small beneficial effects on blood loss (average reduction of 11 ml on 
blood loss) and on the duration of the third stage of labour (average reduction of 6 minutes). The deci 
sion to implement CCT in the context of a prophylactic uterotonic drug should be discussed by the care 
provider and the woman herself. 
 
If ergot alkaloids are used for the prevention of PPH, then CCT to minimize placenta retention is re 
garded as essential.
 
There is insufficient evidence to determine the benefit or risk of CCT when used in conjunction with 
misoprostol. 
 
CCT is the first intervention to treat retained placenta, therefore the teaching of CCT in medical and 
midwifery curricula is essential.
 
The evidence base for recommendations for the timing of cord clamping includes both vaginal and cae 
sarean births. The GDG considers this recommendation to be equally important for caesarean sections.
 
Delayed clamping should be performed during the provision of essential newborn care. For essential 
newborn care and resuscitation, please refer to the WHO guidelines on neonatal resuscitation. (10) 
 
The recommendations for the timing of cord clamping apply equally to preterm and term births. The 
GDG considers the benefits of delayed clamping for preterm infants to be particularly important.
(Continued on next page)

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
17
 
Some health professionals working in areas of high HIV prevalence have expressed concern regard 
ing delayed cord clamping as part of management of the third stage of labour. These professionals are 
concerned that during placental separation, a partially detached placenta could be exposed to maternal 
blood and this could lead to a micro-transfusion of maternal blood to the baby. It has been demonstrat 
ed that the potential for maternal-to-child transmission of HIV can take place at three different points 
in time: micro-transfusions of maternal blood to the fetus during pregnancy (intra-uterine HIV transmis 
sion), exposure to maternal blood and vaginal secretions when the fetus passes through the birth canal 
in vaginal deliveries (intra-partum transmission), and during breastfeeding (postnatal infection). For this 
reason, the main intervention to reduce the maternal-to-child transmission is the reduction of mater 
nal viral load through the use of antiretroviral drugs during pregnancy, childbirth and postnatal period. 
There is no evidence that delaying the cord clamping increases the possibility of HIV transmission from 
the mother to the newborn. Maternal blood percolates through the placental intervillous space through 
out pregnancy with a relatively low risk of maternal fetal transmission before delivery. It is highly un 
likely that separation of the placenta increases exposure to maternal blood, and is highly unlikely that 
it disrupts the fetal placental circulation (i.e. it is unlikely that during placenta separation the newborn 
circulation is exposed to maternal blood). Thus, the proven benefits of a 1 3 minute delay at least in 
clamping the cord outweigh the theoretical, and unproven, harms. Late cord clamping is recommended 
even among women living with HIV or women with unknown HIV status.
 
There is a lack of evidence regarding the role of uterine massage for PPH prevention when no uterotonic 
drugs are used, or if a uterotonic drug other than oxytocin is used. 
 
Although the GDG acknowledged that one small study reported that sustained uterine massage and clot 
expulsion were associated with a reduction in the use of additional uterotonics, there is lack of robust 
evidence supporting other benefits. However, the GDG considered that routine and frequent uterine 
tone assessment remains a crucial part of immediate postpartum care, particularly for the optimization 
of early PPH diagnosis.
 
Based on the most recent evidence, understanding of the contribution of each component of the active 
management of the third stage of labour package has evolved. The GDG considered that this package 
has a primary intervention: the use of an uterotonic. In the context of oxytocin use, CCT may add a 
small benefit, while uterine massage may add no benefit for the prevention of PPH. Early cord clamping 
is generally contraindicated.
(Continued from previous page)

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
18
Box 3: Recommendations for the prevention of PPH in caesarean sections
11. Oxytocin (IV or IM) is the recommended uterotonic drug for the prevention of PPH in caesar 
ean section. (Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
12. Cord traction is the recommended method for the removal of the placenta in caesarean sec 
tion. (Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
Remarks
 
The GDG noted that, in terms of blood loss, there was not enough evidence to recommend oxytocin 
infusion over IV bolus injection. However, due to concerns regarding adverse haemodynamic effects, 
the GDG considered that if an IV bolus injection is used, a slow injection rate is preferred and a rapid 
injection rate should be avoided. 
 
The GDG noted that the combination of an oxytocin infusion after an initial IV bolus of oxytocin after 
caesarean delivery reduces the need for additional uterotonic agents but does not affect the overall 
occurrence of major obstetric haemorrhage. 
 
The GDG noted that carbetocin is associated with a reduction in the use of additional uterotonic agents 
but with no difference in the occurrence of major obstetric haemorrhage. In addition, the GDG noted 
that the use of carbetocin is considerably more expensive than oxytocin. This remark is equally appli 
cable to vaginal deliveries.
Table 1: Recommendation status of the individual components of the active management 
of the third stage of labour, based on who delivers the intervention
Skilled 
birth attendant
Non-skilled 
birth attendant
Self-administered
Uterotonics
In favour
In favour
Research*
Early cord clamping
Against
Against
Against
Controlled cord traction
Conditional**
Against
Against
Continuous uterine massage
Against***
Against
Research****
* Distribution of misoprostol during the antenatal period for self-administration during the third stage of labour
** Small reduction in blood loss and in the length of the third stage; adoption based on the values and preferences of the 
woman and the health care provider
*** Routine uterine tone assessment remains a vital part of clinical decision making and should be practised during the third 
stage of labour
**** Self-administered uterine massage in the absence of uterotonics

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
19
Box 4: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH uterotonics
13. Intravenous oxytocin is the recommended uterotonic drug for the treatment of PPH. (Strong 
recommendation, moderate quality evidence)
14. If intravenous oxytocin is unavailable, or if the bleeding does not respond to oxytocin, the use 
of intravenous ergometrine, oxytocin-ergometrine fixed dose, or a prostaglandin drug (includ 
ing sublingual misoprostol, 800 g) is recommended. (Strong recommendation, low-quality 
evidence)
Remarks
 
The GDG recommended IV oxytocin as the first line uterotonic drug for the treatment of PPH, including 
when women have already received this drug for the prophylaxis of PPH.
 
The GDG recognized that IV oxytocin may not be available in all settings. It encourages health care 
decision-makers in these settings to strive to make oxytocin available.
 
In settings where IV oxytocin is unavailable to women who have received prophylactic IM oxytocin during 
the third stage of labour, the GDG considered misoprostol to be a valid alternative.
 
If PPH prophylaxis with misoprostol has been administered and if injectable uterotonics are unavailable, 
there is insufficient evidence to guide further misoprostol dosing and consideration must be given to the 
risk of potential toxicity.
 
There is no added benefit to offering misoprostol simultaneously to women receiving oxytocin for the 
treatment of PPH (i.e. adjunct misoprostol).
 
The GDG noted that the two largest trials of misoprostol for the treatment of PPH (Winikoff 2010, Blum 
2010) reported the use of a 800 g dose administered sublingually. The majority of the GDG members 
agreed that 800 g is an acceptable sublingual misoprostol dose for the treatment of PPH, though some 
members of the GDG expressed concern related to the risk of hyperpyrexia associated with this dosage.
 
If IV oxytocin has been used for the treatment of PPH and the bleeding does not stop, there is a paucity 
of data to recommend preferences for second line uterotonic drug treatment. Decisions in such situ 
ations must be guided by the experience of the provider, the availability of the drugs, and by known 
contraindications.
 
In situations in which IM oxytocin can be administered and there is no possibility of IV treatment with 
ergot alkaloids/injectable prostaglandins, there is a paucity of data to recommend a preference of IM 
oxytocin over misoprostol or other uterotonics. Decisions in such situations must be guided by the expe 
rience of the provider, the availability of the drugs, and by known contraindications.
Box 5: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH fluid resuscitation and tranexamic acid
15. The use of isotonic crystalloids is recommended in preference to the use of colloids for the 
intravenous fluid resuscitation of women with PPH. (Strong recommendation, low-quality 
evidence)
16. The use of tranexamic acid is recommended for the treatment of PPH if oxytocin and other 
uterotonics fail to stop the bleeding or if it is thought that the bleeding may be partly due to 
trauma. (Weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
Remarks
 
Evidence for the recommendation of tranexamic acid was extrapolated from the literature on surgery 
and trauma, which shows tranexamic acid to be a safe option for the treatment of trauma-related 
bleeding. 

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
20
Box 6: Recommendations for the treatment of PPH manoeuvres and other procedures
17. Uterine massage is recommended for the treatment of PPH. (Strong recommendation, very-
low-quality evidence)
18. If women do not respond to treatment using uterotonics, or if uterotonics are unavailable, 
the use of intrauterine balloon tamponade is recommended for the treatment of PPH due to 
uterine atony. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
19. If other measures have failed and if the necessary resources are available, the use of uter 
ine artery embolization is recommended as a treatment for PPH due to uterine atony. (Weak 
recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
20. If bleeding does not stop in spite of treatment using uterotonics and other available conserva 
tive interventions (e.g. uterine massage, balloon tamponade), the use of surgical interven 
tions is recommended. (Strong recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
21. The use of bimanual uterine compression is recommended as a temporizing measure until 
appropriate care is available for the treatment of PPH due to uterine atony after vaginal 
delivery. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
22. The use of external aortic compression for the treatment of PPH due to uterine atony after 
vaginal birth is recommended as a temporizing measure until appropriate care is available. 
(Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
23. The use of non-pneumatic anti-shock garments is recommended as a temporizing measure 
until appropriate care is available. (Weak recommendation, low-quality evidence)
24. The use of uterine packing is not recommended for the treatment of PPH due to uterine 
atony after vaginal birth. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
Remarks
 
The GDG noted that the application of these interventions requires training and that maternal discom 
fort and complications associated with these procedures have been reported.
 
Uterine massage as a therapeutic measure is defined as the rubbing of the uterus achieved through the 
manual massaging of the abdomen. This is typically sustained until the bleeding stops or the uterus con 
tracts. The GDP considered that uterine massage should be started once PPH has been diagnosed.
 
The initial rubbing of the uterus and expression of blood clots are not regarded as therapeutic uterine 
massage.
 
When rating the recommendation #17 as strong , the low cost and safety of uterine massage were 
taken into account.
 
The use of balloon tamponade was considered by the GDG to be a measure that can potentially avoid 
surgery or as a temporizing measure while awaiting transfer to a higher level facility. The GDG acknowl 
edges that balloon tamponade can be obtained with specific devices as well as with lower cost adapta 
tions, including those based on the use of condoms and surgical gloves.
 
The GDG noted that uterine artery embolization requires significant resources, in terms of the cost of 
the treatment, the facilities, and the training of health care workers.
 
The GDG noted that conservative surgical approaches should be tried first. If these do not work, they 
should be followed by more invasive procedures. Compression sutures, for example, may be attempted 
as a first intervention, and if these fail, then uterine, utero-ovarian and hypogastric vessel ligation may 
be tried. If life-threatening bleeding continues even after ligation, then a subtotal (otherwise known as 
supracervical) or total hysterectomy should be performed.
 
The GDG acknowledged that the level of health care provider skills will play a role in the selection and 
sequence of the surgical interventions.
(Continued on next page)

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
21
 
External aortic compression has long been recommended as a potential life-saving technique, and me 
chanical compression of the aorta, if successful, slows blood loss. The GDG placed a high value on this 
procedure as a temporizing measure in the treatment of PPH.
 
The GDG noted that research evaluating the potential benefits and harms of non-pneumatic anti-shock 
garments is ongoing. Based on the evidence available, the GDG regarded non-pneumatic anti-shock gar 
ments as a temporizing measure while transfer is awaited.
 
The GDG noted that there was no evidence of benefit of uterine packing and placed a high value on 
concerns regarding its potential harm.
Box 7: Recommendations for the treatment of retained placenta
25. If the placenta is not expelled spontaneously, the use of additional oxytocin (10 IU, IV/IM) in 
combination with controlled cord traction is recommended. (Weak recommendation, very-
low-quality evidence)
26. The use of ergometrine for the management of a retained placenta is not recommended as 
this may cause tetanic uterine contractions which may delay the expulsion of the placenta. 
(Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
27. The use of prostaglandin E2 alpha (dinoprostone or sulprostone) in the management of re 
tained placenta is not recommended. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
28. A single dose of antibiotics (ampicillin or first-generation cephalosporin) is recommended if 
manual removal of the placenta is practised. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evi 
dence)
Remarks
 
The GDG found no empirical evidence to support recommending the use of uterotonics for the manage 
ment of a retained placenta in the absence of haemorrhage. The above recommendation was reached 
by consensus.
 
The WHO guide, Managing complications in pregnancy and childbirth (WHO, 2007), states that if a 
placenta is not expelled within 30 minutes after the delivery of a baby, the woman should be diagnosed 
as having a retained placenta. Since there is no evidence for or against this definition, the delay used 
before this condition is diagnosed is left to the judgement of the clinician.
 
The same WHO guide also suggests that in the absence of haemorrhage, the woman should be observed 
for a further 30 minutes after the initial 30 minutes, before the manual removal of the placenta is at 
tempted. The GDG noted that spontaneous expulsion of the placenta can still occur, even in the absence 
of bleeding. A conservative approach is therefore advised and the timing of the manual removal of the 
placenta as a definitive treatment is left to the judgement of the clinician.
 
The recommendation regarding the use of prostaglandin E2 is informed by a lack of evidence on this 
question and also by concerns related to adverse events, particularly cardiac events.
 
Direct evidence of the value of antibiotic prophylaxis after the manual removal of the placenta was not 
available. The GDG considered indirect evidence of the benefit of prophylactic antibiotics from studies 
of caesarean section and abortion, as well as observational studies of other intrauterine manipulations.
 
Current practice suggests that ampicillin or first-generation cephalosporins may be administered when 
the manual removal of the placenta is performed.
 
This question was identified as a research priority for settings in which prophylactic antibiotics are not 
routinely administered and those with low infectious morbidity. 
(Continued from previous page)

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
22
Box 8: Health Systems and Organization of Care recommendations for the prevention and 
treatment of PPH
29. The use of formal protocols by health facilities for the prevention and treatment of PPH is 
recommended. (Weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
30. The use of formal protocols for referral of women to a higher level of care is recommended 
for health facilities. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
31. The use of simulations of PPH treatment is recommended for pre-service and in-service train 
ing programmes. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence)
32. Monitoring the use of uterotonics after birth for the prevention of PPH is recommended as 
a process indicator for programmatic evaluation. (Weak recommendation, very-low-quality 
evidence)
Remarks
 
Routine and frequent uterine tone assessment remains a crucial part of immediate postpartum care, 
particularly for optimizing the early diagnosis of PPH.
 
The GDG acknowledged that the implementation of formal protocols is a complex process which will 
require the local adaptation of general guidelines.
 
The GDG placed a high value on the costs of simulation programmes and acknowledged that there are 
different types of simulation programmes. Some programmes are hi-tech, computerized and costly while 
others are less expensive and more likely to be affordable in low- and middle-income countries. The 
GDG identified improvement in communication between health care providers and patients and their 
family members as an important priority in the training of health care providers in PPH management.
 
The GDG recommended monitoring the use of prophylactic uterotonics. This recommendation is based 
on experience from other areas of health care, particularly child health, where content-based health 
indicators are common and regarded as useful for programmatic purposes. The suggested indicator is 
calculated as the number of women receiving prophylactic uterotonic drugs after birth divided by all 
women giving birth.

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
23
Box 9: Statements related to topics for which there is insufficient evidence to issue a recom 
mendation
A. There is insufficient evidence to recommend one oxytocin route over another for the prevention of PPH.
B. There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of recombinant factor VIIa for the treatment of 
PPH.
C. There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of intraumbilical vein injection of oxytocin as a 
treatment for retained placenta.
D. There is insufficient evidence to recommend the antenatal distribution of misoprostol to pregnant 
women for self-administration for the prevention of PPH. 
E. There is insufficient evidence to recommend the measurement of blood loss over clinical estimation of 
blood loss.
Remarks
 
The GDG noted that there are three ongoing trials in which the IV and IM routes for oxytocin administra 
tion are being compared for the prevention of PPH.
 
The GDG considered there to be insufficient evidence to recommend the use of oxytocin infusion over 
IV bolus injection with regard to blood loss. However, in light of concerns about the potential adverse 
haemodynamic effects, the GDG considered that if IV bolus injection treatment is to be used then a 
slow injection rate is preferred and a rapid injection rate should be avoided.
 
In the context of PPH, the GDP considered that the use of recombinant factor VIIa should be limited to 
women with specific haematological indications. The group regarded the recombinant factor VIIa as a 
potentially life-saving drug, but noted that it is also associated with life-threatening side-effects. More 
over, recombinant factor VIIa is expensive and may be difficult to administer.
 
The GDG acknowledged that while there is a paucity of data to recommend intraumbilical vein injec 
tion of oxytocin as a treatment for retained placenta, the procedure itself has not been shown to cause 
harm and demonstrates a non-significant trend towards a lower risk of requiring the manual removal of 
the placenta.
 
The GDG acknowledged that a number of countries have embarked on community-level programmes of 
misoprostol distribution and considered that this should be done in the context of research (where reli 
able data on coverage, safety and health outcomes can be collected).
 
The GDG noted that all trials included in the systematic review on the measurement of blood loss were 
conducted in developed countries and views the applicability of this evidence to low- and middle-
income countries as very uncertain.

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
24
4. Research implications
The GDG identified important knowledge gaps that need to be addressed through 
primary research. In this guideline, recommendations based on evidence quality that 
was rated as very low or low require further research. Conversely, further re 
search is not a priority for those recommendations based on evidence of moderate 
or high quality. Knowledge gaps identified in the 2007 and 2009 WHO documents 
were also reviewed. The identified knowledge gaps were prioritized by considering 
whether such research would be feasible, innovative, original, likely to promote 
equity, and contribute to the reduction of the burden of PPH. The main barriers to 
scaling up the intervention were also considered in this prioritization exercise.
The GDG noted that research is either planned or ongoing for some of the research 
priorities identified. However, there is no certainty that these investigations will 
provide conclusive results, and the topics have therefore remained listed as re 
search priorities in this document.
Key research priority
In settings where the use of injectable uterotonics is not feasible, what are the ef 
fects of antenatal distribution of misoprostol to pregnant women for self-administra 
tion during the third stage of labour?
Other research questions 
 
What is the minimum effective dose of oxytocin for the prevention of PPH? 
 
What are the effects of IM oxytocin (versus IV oxytocin) for the prevention of 
PPH?
 
Can oxytocin be administered safely by unskilled attendants?
 
What are the effects of buccal and sublingual use of oxytocin for the prevention 
of PPH?
 
What is the minimum effective dose of misoprostol for the prevention of PPH?
 
What is the minimum effective dose of misoprostol for the treatment of PPH?
 
What are effects and safety of misoprostol as treatment for PPH, in women who 
received misoprostol as PPH prophylaxis? 
 
Should misoprostol be used in addition to oxytocin for PPH prevention?
 
What are the effects of tranexamic acid in PPH treatment?
 
What are the effects of uterine massage for the prevention of PPH?
 
What are the effects of uterine massage to prevent PPH, where oxytocin is not 
available? 
 
What are the effects of uterine balloon or tamponade in the treatment of PPH?
 
What are the effects of uterine massage to prevent PPH, where only misoprostol 
is available? 

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
25
 
What are the effects of prophylactic antibiotics after manual extraction of the 
placenta as part of the treatment of retained placenta?
 
What are the effects of the use of misoprostol for the treatment of retained 
placenta?
 
What are effects of ergometrine (in combination or not with oxytocin) after 
caesarean section for the prevention of PPH?
 
What is the optimal time for cord clamping in the context of physiologic and ac 
tive management of third stage of labour?
 
What is the appropriate time to administer oxytocin for PPH prevention, rela 
tive to cord clamping and placental delivery? (i.e. before/after cord clamping, 
before/after placenta delivery)
 
Which clinical consequences of blood loss are of greatest value for the diagnosis 
and treatment of PPH?
 
What is the role of lay health workers in management of PPH?
5. Dissemination and implementation of 
the guideline
The ultimate goal of this guideline is to improve the quality of care and health 
outcomes related to PPH. Therefore the dissemination and implementation of this 
guideline are crucial steps that should be undertaken by the international commu 
nity and local health care services. The WHO Department of Reproductive Health 
and Research has adopted a formal knowledge-to-action framework for the dissemi 
nation, adaptation and implementation of guidelines (8). In addition to this frame 
work, a list of priority actions was established during the WHO Technical Consulta 
tion which will be used by the WHO and other partners to foster the dissemination 
and implementation of this guideline (EB Box 2).
Guideline dissemination and evaluation
The recommendations in this guideline will be disseminated through a broad net 
work of international partners, including WHO country and regional offices, min 
istries of health, WHO collaborating centres, other United Nations agencies, and 
non-governmental organizations. They will also be published on the WHO website 
and in The WHO Reproductive Health Library (11), where they will be accompanied 
by an independent critical appraisal based on the AGREE instrument (Appraisal of 
Guidelines Research and Evaluation) which can be found at http://www.agreecol 
laboration.org/instrument. A policy brief will also be developed for a wide range of 
policy-makers, programme managers and clinicians, and then disseminated through 
WHO country offices.
Guideline implementation
The successful introduction of evidence-based policies related to the prevention and 
management of PPH into national programmes and health care services depends on 
well-planned and participatory consensus-driven processes of adaptation and imple 

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
26
mentation. These processes may include the development or revision of existing 
national guidelines or protocols based on this document.
The recommendations contained in the present guideline should be adapted into 
locally-appropriate documents that are able to meet the specific needs of each 
country and health service. Modifications to the recommendations, where necessary, 
should be limited to weak recommendations and justifications for any changes made 
in an explicit and transparent manner. 
An enabling environment should be created for the use of these recommendations 
(for example, by widening the availability of uterotonics), including changes in the 
behaviour of health care practitioners to enable the use of evidence-based practic 
es. Local professional societies may play important roles in this process and an all-
inclusive and participatory process should be encouraged. The WHO s Department of 
Reproductive Health and Research has published specific guidance on the introduc 
tion of the WHO s reproductive health guidelines and tools in national programmes.
6. Applicability issues
Anticipated impact on the organization of care and 
resources
The evidence-based prevention and management of PPH can be achieved with the 
use of relatively inexpensive drugs. However, the GDG noted that the following is 
sues should be considered before the recommendations made in this current guide 
line are applied:
 
Women should not be left alone during the first hours after delivery of the baby 
and the placenta
 
In settings where oxytocin is used, attention should be paid to the oxytocin cold 
chain (i.e. the requirements of a temperature-controlled supply chain)
 
Health services adopting late cord clamping should also adopt strategies to iden 
tify (and if necessary to treat) neonatal jaundice
Monitoring and evaluating the guideline implementation
The implementation of the recommendations in this guideline should be monitored 
at the health-service level. Interrupted time series, clinical audits or criterion-based 
clinical audits could be used to obtain relevant data related to the management of 
PPH. Clearly-defined review criteria and indicators are needed and these could be 
associated with locally-agreed targets. The GDG strongly recommends that the cov 
erage of prophylactic uterotonics be used as a process indicator for the monitoring 
and prevention of PPH.
 
Prophylactic Uterotonic Coverage Indicator: The suggested indicator is calculat 
ed as the number of women receiving prophylactic uterotonics during the third 
stage of labour divided by all women giving birth
This indicator provides an overall assessment of adherence to a key recommendation 
included in this guideline. The use of other locally-agreed and more specific indica 

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
27
tors (e.g. the assessment of the use of specific uterotonics) may be necessary to 
obtain a more complete assessment of the quality of care related to the prevention 
and treatment of PPH. WHO has developed specific guidance for evaluating the qual 
ity of care for severe maternal complications (including PPH) based on the near-miss 
and criterion-based clinical audit concepts (13).
7. Updating the guideline
This guideline will be updated in 2017 or following the identification of new evi 
dence that indicates a need to revise these recommendations. WHO welcomes sug 
gestions regarding additional questions for inclusion in the updated guideline. Please 
e-mail your suggestions to: reproductivehealth@who.int.
References
1. Khan KS, Wojdyla D, Say L, G lmezoglu AM, Van Look PF. WHO analysis of causes 
of maternal death: A systematic review. Lancet. 2006;367 (9516): 1066 74. 
2. Campbell OM, Graham WJ. Lancet Maternal Survival Series Steering Group. 
Strategies for reducing maternal mortality: getting on with what works. Lancet. 
2006;368 (9543): 1284 99. 
3. World Health Organization. World Health Organization multicountry survey on 
maternal and newborn health. Geneva: WHO; 2012 
4. World Health Organization. Managing complication in pregnancy and child 
birth: a guide for midwives and doctors. Geneva: WHO; 2000. Available from: 
http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perinatal_ 
health/9241545879/en/index.html 
5. Begley CM, Gyte GM, Devane D, McGuire W, Weeks A. Active versus expect 
ant management for women in the third stage of labour. Cochrane Data 
base Syst Rev. 2011(11). Available from: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/14651858.CD007412.pub3/abstract
6. World Health Organization. WHO recommendations for the prevention of post 
partum haemorrhage. Geneva: WHO; 2007. Available from: http://whqlibdoc.
who.int/hq/2007/WHO_MPS_07.06_eng.pdf 
7. World Health Organization. WHO guidelines for the management of postpar 
tum haemorrhage and retained placenta. Geneva: WHO; 2009. Available from: 
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2009/9789241598514_eng.pdf 
8. World Health Organization. Knowledge to action framework and the G.R.E.A.T 
project. Geneva: WHO; 2010. Available from: http://www.who.int/reproduc 
tivehealth/topics/best_practices/greatproject_KTAframework/en/index.html 
9. World Health Organization. WHO Handbook for guideline development. 
Geneva: WHO; 2012. Available from: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstre
am/10665/75146/1/9789241548441_eng.pdf

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
28
10. World Health Organization. Guidelines on basic newborn resuscitation. 
Geneva: WHO; 2012. Available from: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstre
am/10665/75157/1/9789241503693_eng.pdf
11. World Health Organization. The WHO Reproductive Health Library. Geneva: WHO. 
Available from: www.who.int/rhl
12. World Health Organization. Introducing WHO s sexual and reproductive health 
guidelines and tools into national programmes: principles and process of adap 
tation and implementation. Geneva: WHO; 2007. Available from: http://www. 
who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/general/RHR_07_09/en/index.html 
13. World Health Organization. Evaluating the quality of care for severe preg 
nancy complications: the WHO near-miss approach for maternal health. 
Geneva: WHO; 2011. Available from: http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publica 
tions/2011/9789241502221_eng.pdf 
The full list of references that support the recommendations is included in the docu 
ment entitled WHO recommendations for post partum haemorrhage: evidence base 
and can be accessed online at: www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/mater 
nal_perinatal_health/9789241548502/en/

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
29
Annex 1. External experts, WHO staff involved in the 
preparation of the guideline, and summary of decla 
rations of interest
A. Guideline Development Group (participants in the WHO Technical Consultation)
Members (WHO External Advisers) 
Professor Hany Abdel-Aleem
Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Women s Health Center
Assiut University Hospital
Assiut
Egypt
Dr Catherine Deneux-Tharaux
Medical Epidemiologist and Researcher
Inserm U953
Recherche pid miologique en sant p rinatale et 
sant des femmes et des enfants
H pital Tenon
Paris
France
Dr Bukola Fawole
Senior Lecturer
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
College of Medicine
University of Ibadan
Ibadan
Nigeria
Dr Atf Gh rissi
Ma tre Assistante Universitaire en Sciences de 
l Education appliqu es la Sant 
Ecole Sup rieure des Sciences et Techniques de la 
Sant Universit 
Tunis-El Manar
Tunisia
Ms Gill Gyte
Research Associate
Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group
University of Liverpool
Liverpool Women s Hospital NHS Trust
Crown Street
United Kingdom
Dr Justus Hofmeyr
Director
Effective Care Research Unit 
University of the Witwatersrand/ 
University of Fort Hare/ 
Eastern Cape Department of Health
Amalinda Drive
Private Bag X9047
East London 
Eastern Cape 5201
South Africa
Dr Simon Lewin
Senior Researcher
Global Health Unit
Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the Health 
Services & Medical Research Council, South Africa
Oslo
Norway
Professor Syeda Batool Mazhar
Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Mother and Child Health Centre (MCH) Pakistan 
Institute of Medical Sciences
Islamabad
Pakistan
Professor Suneeta Mittal
Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Officer-in-Charge of the WHO Collaborating 
Centre for Research on Human Reproduction
All India Institute of Medical Sciences
New Delhi
India
Dr Enrique Oyarzun
Chairman 
Department Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Facultad de Medicina
Pontificia Universidad Cat lica de Chile
Santiago
Chile

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
30
Dr Zahida Qureshi
Senior Lecturer
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
University of Nairobi
Nairobi
Kenya
Professor Hamid Rushwan
Chief Executive 
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
FIGO House, Suite 3
Waterloo Court, 10 Theed Street
London 
SE1 8ST
United Kingdom
Dr Jeffrey Michael Smith
Director, Maternal Health, MCHIP
Washington
USA
Dr Tran Son Thach
Perinatal Epidemiologist
Australian Research Centre for Health of Women and 
Babies
Discipline of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
The University of Adelaide
Women s and Children s Hospital
King William Road
Australia
Dr Dilys Walker
Associate Professor
Department of Global Health and Obstetrics & 
Gynecology
University of Washington
Ninth & Jefferson Building, Harborview Medical Center
Seattle, WA
USA
Observers
Ms Deborah Armbruster
Senior Maternal and Newborn Health Advisor
Center for Population, Health and Nutrition
United States Agency for International Development
Washington D.C.
USA
Ms Jennifer Blum
Gynuity Health Projects
New York 
USA
Ms Claire Glenton
Senior Researcher
Nordic Cochrane Centre, Norwegian Branch/ 
Global Health Unit 
Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the Health Services
Oslo
Norway
Dr Sarah Rosenbaum 
Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the Health Services
Oslo
Norway
Ms Mary Ellen Stanton
Senior Reproductive Health Advisor
Center for Population, Health and Nutrition
United States Agency for International Development
Washington D.C.
USA
Ms Clare Waite
Project Manager
Misoprostol for Post-Partum Haemorrhage in Low 
Resource Settings
International Federation of Gynecology and 
Obstetrics
FIGO House
London 
United Kingdom
Dr Beverly Winikoff
Gynuity Health Projects
New York
USA 

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
31
WHO Regional and Country Offices
AFRO
Dr Alicia Carbonell
National Professional Officer
Making Pregnancy Safer and Reproductive Health
Bureau de pays de l OMS 
PO Box CP 377 
Maputo 
Mozambique
SEARO
Dr Narimah Awin
Medical Officer
Making Pregnancy Safer and Reproductive Health
Department of Family and Research
World Health Organization 
Regional Office for South-East Asia
World Health House, Indraprastha Estate
Mahatma Gandhi Marg
New Delhi 110 002
India
WPRO
Dr Hiromi Obara
Medical Officer
Maternal and Child Health and Nutrition
Building Healthy Communities and Populations
World Health Organization 
Regional Office for the Western Pacific
P.O. Box 2932
1000 Manila
Philippines 
External Secretariat
Dr Edgardo Abalos
Centro Rosarino de Estudios Perinatales (CREP)
Rosario 
Argentina
Dr Virginia Diaz
Centro Rosarino de Estudios Perinatales (CREP)
Rosario 
Argentina
Dr Natasha Hezelgrave
Academic Clinical Fellow, Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Kings College London
Guy s & St Thomas NHS Foundation Trust
London
United Kingdom
WHO Secretariat
Dr Michael Mbizvo
Director 
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
Dr Ana Pilar Betran
Medical Officer
Improving Maternal and Perinatal Health
Research, Evidence and Norms
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
Dr Metin G lmezoglu
Lead Specialist
Improving Maternal and Perinatal Health
Research, Evidence and Norms
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
Dr Matthews Mathai
Coordinator
Epidemiology, Monitoring and Evaluation
Department of 
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent 
Health (MCA)
Dr Jo o Paulo Souza
Medical Officer
Improving Maternal and Perinatal Health Research, 
Evidence and Norms
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
Dr Joshua Vogel
Improving Maternal and Perinatal Health Research, 
Evidence and Norms
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
Dr Mariana Widmer
Technical officer
Improving Maternal and Perinatal Health Research, 
Evidence and Norms
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
B. Guideline Steering Group
Dr A. Metin G lmezoglu (WHO)
Dr Matthews Mathai (WHO)
Dr Jo o Paulo Souza (WHO)
Dr Edgardo Abalos (CREP)
Dr Virginia Diaz (CREP)
Dr Natasha Hezelgrave (KCL)

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
32
C. Summary of the declarations of interest: Members of the GDG
Name
Region 
Country
Declaration of Conflict 
of interest 
(please indicate yes or 
 no for each section)
Advice from 
Legal Department 
(please indicate 
 yes or no )
Meeting 
restriction: 
Please indicate 
see below for 
explanation)
A
B 
C 
D
Professor Hany 
Abdel-Aleem
EMRO
Egypt
Y
N 
N
N
N
N
Dr Catherine 
Deneux-Tharaux
EURO
France
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Dr Bukola Fawole
AFRO
Nigeria 
N
N
N
N
N
N
Dr Atf Gh rissi
EMRO
Tunisia
N
N
N
N
N
N
Ms Gill Gyte
EURO
UK
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Dr Justus Hofmeyr
AFRO
South 
Africa
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Dr Simon Lewin
EURO
Norway/
South 
Africa
N
N
N
N
N
N
Professor Syeda 
Batool Mazhar
EMRO
Pakistan
N
N
N
N
N
N
Dr Enrique 
Oyarzun
AMRO
Chile
N
N
N
N
N
N
Dr Zahida Qureshi
AFRO
Kenya
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Professor 
Hamid Rushwan 
EURO
Sudan/UK
N
N
N
N
N
N
Dr Jeffrey Michael 
Smith
AMRO
USA
N
N
N
N
N
N
Dr Tran Son Thach
WPRO
Vietnam /
Australia
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Dr Dilys Walker
AMRO
USA
Y
N
N
N
N
N
A: Involved in academic work related to the topic of the meeting/guideline
B: Declared any commercial financial interest, related to the topic of the meeting/guideline
C: Declared any commercial financial interest, not directly related to the topic of the meeting/guideline
D: Declared non-commercial interest or grants related to the topic of the meeting/guideline

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
33
Annex 2. Critical outcomes for decision making
PPH prevention
Critical outcomes
Fewer maternal deaths
Fewer events of severe PPH (blood loss >1000 ml)
Less use of blood transfusion
Important outcomes
Fewer admissions to intensive care unit
Blood loss 500 ml
Additional uterotonics
Mean blood loss
Postpartum anaemia
Breastfeeding
Less anaemia in infancy
Any side effect of intervention
Any side effect requiring treatment
Nausea
Vomiting
Diarrhoea
Headache
Abdominal pain
High blood pressure
Shivering
Maternal temperature 38 C
Maternal temperature 40 C
PPH treatment
Critical outcomes
Additional blood loss 500 ml
Additional blood loss 1000 ml
Blood transfusion
Additional uterotonics
Invasive non-surgical interventions
Surgical interventions (including hysterectomy)
Maternal temperature 40 C
Procedure-related complications
Infections
Severe morbidity
Maternal transfer
Reduction of time from decision-making to implemen 
tation
Availability of drugs and treatment
Important outcomes
Accuracy in blood loss assessment
Mean blood loss
Postpartum anaemia
Additional non-surgical interventions (e.g. external 
aortic compression and compression garments)
Artery embolization
Nausea, vomiting or shivering
Maternal temperature 38 C
Delayed initiation of breastfeeding
Prolonged hospitalization

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
34
Annex 3: Summary of the considerations related to the strength of the recommen 
dations (Balance Worksheets)
Box 1. Summary of considerations related to the strength of the recommendations (Recommendations 1 5) 
Recommendation
1
2
3
4
5
Intervention
Uterotonics for PPH 
prevention
Oxytocin for PPH prevention
Other uterotonics for PPH 
prevention
Misoprostol by community 
health workers for PPH 
prevention
CCT by skilled birth 
attendants for PPH 
prevention
Quality of the 
evidence
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits versus 
disadvantages
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
Recommendation 
direction
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall ranking
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
35
Box 2. Summary of considerations related to the strength of the recommendations (Recommendations 6 10) 
Recommendation
6
7
8
9
10
Intervention
CCT by unskilled birth 
attendants for PPH 
prevention
Late cord clamping for PPH 
prevention
Early cord clamping for PPH 
prevention
Sustained uterine massage 
for PPH prevention
Postpartum abdominal 
assessment of uterine tonus
Quality of the
evidence
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits versus 
disadvantages
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
Recommendation 
direction
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall ranking
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
36
Box 3. Summary of considerations related to the strength of the recommendations (Recommendations 11 15) 
Recommendation
11
12
13
14
15
Intervention
Oxytocin for PPH prevention 
in CS
CCT for PPH prevention in 
CS
Oxytocin for PPH treatment
Other uterotonic drugs for 
PPH treatment
Isotonic crystalloids for PPH 
treatment
Quality of the 
evidence
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits versus 
disadvantages
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
Recommendation 
direction
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall ranking
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
37
Box 4. Summary of considerations related to the strength of the recommendations (Recommendations 16 20) 
Recommendation
16
17
18
19
20
Intervention
Tranexamic acid for PPH 
treatment
Uterine massage for PPH 
treatment
Intrauterine balloon 
tamponade for PPH 
treatment
Uterine artery embolization 
for PPH treatment
Surgical interventions for 
PPH treatment
Quality of the 
evidence
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits versus 
disadvantages
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
Recommendation 
direction
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall ranking
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation*
 Weak recommendation

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
38
Box 5. Summary of considerations related to the strength of the recommendations (Recommendations 21 25) 
Recommendation
21
22
23
24
25
Intervention
Bimanual uterine 
compression for PPH 
treatment
External aortic compression 
for PPH treatment
Non-pneumatic anti-shock 
garment for PPH treatment
Uterine packing for PPH 
treatment
Uterotonics and CCT for 
retained placenta
Quality of the 
evidence
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits versus 
disadvantages
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
Recommendation 
direction
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall ranking
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
39
Box 6. Summary of considerations related to the strength of the recommendations (Recommendations 26 30) 
Recommendation
26
27
28
29
30
Intervention
Ergometrine for retained 
placenta
Prostaglandin E2 alpha for 
retained placenta
Antibiotics with manual 
removal for retained 
placenta
Formal protocols for PPH 
treatment
Formal protocols for patient 
referral
Quality of the 
evidence
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
Absolute 
magnitude of 
effect
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits versus 
disadvantages
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
Recommendation 
direction
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall ranking
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
40
Box 7. Summary of considerations related to the strength of the recommendations 
(Recommendations 31 32) 
Recommendation
31
32
Intervention
Simulations of PPH 
treatment
Monitoring the use of 
uterotonics
Quality of the 
evidence
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
Values and 
preferences
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
Absolute magnitude 
of effect
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
Balance of 
benefits versus 
disadvantages
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and disadvantages 
are balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Resource use
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
Feasibility
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
Recommendation 
direction
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall ranking
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation

WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
41
Box 8. Template for the summary of considerations related to the strength of the recommendations with explanations for completing the template 
Recommendation
Which recommendation?
Intervention
What is the intervention?
Quality of the 
evidence
 High
 Moderate
 Low
 Very low
The higher the quality of the evidence, the stronger the recommendation.
If the evidence quality is low or very low , consider more carefully the other criteria below in deciding the strength of the 
recommendation.
Values and 
preferences
 No significant variability
 Significant variability
This refers to values placed by health workers, policy-makers, patients and other stakeholders on the intended outcomes of 
the interventions.
If there is wide variability between the values and preferences of various stakeholders, the intervention is less likely to have a 
strong recommendation.
Magnitude of 
effect in critical 
outcomes
 Large effect (RR>2 or 
RR<0.5)
 Small effect (0.5<RR<2)
This refers to the potential of the intervention to have large effects. The effects can be enhanced by being combined with 
other interventions. Consider which potential associations (or bundles ) can enhance effects.
The larger the potential effects and the longer the time period of the potential effects, the more likely the intervention is to 
have a strong recommendation.
Balance of 
benefits versus 
disadvantages
 Benefits outweigh 
disadvantages
 Benefits and 
disadvantages are 
balanced
 Disadvantages outweigh 
benefits
Benefits refer to the intended positive effects of an intervention .
Disadvantages refer to the potentially negative effects of an intervention as well as its unintended effects.
The fewer the potentially negative effects there are, the more likely the intervention is to receive a strong recommendation.
Resource use
 Less resource intensive
 More resource intensive
The resources needed for the implementation of a recommendation may include financial resources, human resources, 
and infrastructure or equipment. Ideally, the cost of the benefits of an intervention should be reasonable, affordable and 
sustainable. It should be remembered that capital costs, such as those required for infrastructural development, may be 
initially high but may also yield long-term benefits. 
Generally, interventions that incur higher incremental or recurrent costs are less likely to be strongly recommended.
Feasibility
 Yes, globally
 Yes, conditionally
Political commitment and wide stakeholder engagement are prerequisites for interventions. The technical feasibility of 
interventions also depends on sufficiently functional organizational and institutional structures to manage, follow through, 
and monitor the implementation of the recommendation. The elements of technical feasibility vary considerably by country 
and by context; where these elements are likely to be functional across a wide variety of settings it is more likely that 
interventions will receive strong recommendations.
Recommendation 
direction
 In favour of the 
intervention
 Against the intervention
Overall ranking
 Strong recommendation
 Weak recommendation
Strength of the recommendation.

For more information, please contact:
Department of Reproductive Health and Research
E-mail: reproductivehealth@who.int
www.who.int/reproductivehealth
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health
E-mail: mncah@who.int
www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent
World Health Organization
Avenue Appia 20, CH-1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland